HE CONCEPT OF THE POLITICAL

by CARL SCHMITT


THE CONCEPT OF THE POLITICAL
EXPANDED EDITION

CARL SCHMITT



Carl Schmitt was a prominent legal scholar  in  post—World War I Germany and one of the leading intellectuals during the Weimar period. Exceptionally active as a teacher and publicist, he probed the nature and sources of what he took to be the weakness of the moclern  liberal,  parliamentary  state,  both  in  its  embodiment in  the  Weimar  constitution  and   more  broadly  as  the  modern  form
of  political  organization.   He   joined   the   Nazi  Party  in   i933   (in
May,  the  same  month  as  did  Martin  Heidegger)  and published


' In Victor Gourevitch and Michael Roth, eds., Leo Strauss, On T yranny: Including the Strauss-Kojeve Debate (New York: Free Press, 99'). PP 5— '
tX
x	Tracy  B. Strong
several works, some of them anti-Semitic, in which he explicitly defended the policies of the regime. (He would later claim that he was trying to give his own understanding  of Nazi  ideas.)*  IR 1936 he was severely criticized in articles published in Das Schwarze Ko-rps, an official SS organ. Protected by Herman Goring, he re- mained in his post at the University of Berlin and  continued  teach- ing and writing but with a much reduced locus on contemporary domestic  Cerman  matters.  He  was  detained  for  an eighteen-month
period after the war by Allied authorities, but never  formally  charged with crimes. He never resumed a university position. Fest- schriften were published on the occasions of his seventieth and eightieth birthdays; among the authors contributing were Julien Freund,  Reinhart Koselleck,  and   Karlfried   Gr under.  He  died   in i qS$ at the age of ninety-six.
From the beginning of his career, Schmitt was taken  seri- ously on all parts of the political spectrum. The young Carl Friedrich (later to become a central author of the postwar German constitution,  a  Harvard   professor,  and   president  of  the American
Political Science Association) cited him approvingly, in i 93o, on Article  48  of  the  Weimar  constitution,   which  permitted  commis-
sarial dictatorship, a step that Schmitt had urged on Hindenberg.’ Franz Neumann, the socialist and left-wing sociologist author of Behemoth, drew extensively upon Schmitt, as did his colleague and  friend  Otto Kirchheimer.’  Indeed, all of the  Frankfurt School

See the transcript of his interrogation after the war  in  Joseph  W. Hcndcr- sky, “Schmitt  at  Nurcmbcrg,”  TelOS  72 (Summer  9*7  rd  • 6— I o/.  The   stan- dards  English  biography  (quite  sy apathetic),  also  by  Benclersk y,  is  Carl Schmitt:
Theoi 1st fot the R.eich (1’rincctun: Pr inceton University Press, i983).
C. J. F rieclrich, “Dictatorship in €*ermany?” Foreign Affairs g, no. i
(October i 93o).  It  is  worth  noting  that  most  of  those  who  defend  or  apologize for Schmitt pull out a long list of those who have cited him favorably.
For a somewhat sensationali st but still  revealing  discussion  of the changes in attitudcs by left-wing scholars to Schmitt, see Cieorgc Schwab, “Carl Schmitt: Through a Cilass Eiar k ly,” ñ?/eciica i 2 (i Ash), pp. j i —2z. I owe this reference to Paul Ed ward €iottfrieci, Carl Schmitt: Poli!tics and Theory (New York: I“ reen wooci Press, i 99o), p. i z6.
Forewot d	xi
(especially Walter Benjamin) spoke highly of him, often after i 933. More  recently, the  Italian  and  French  Left, as well as those  associ-
ated with the radical jour na1 Telos, have  approvingly  investigated his nonideological conception of  the  political.‘  The  European Right, as well as American conservatives of a Straussian persuasion, find in his work at least  the  beginnings  of  a  theory  of  authority that might address the supposed failings of  individualistic  liberal- ism. Just as interestingly, a number of defenders of liberalism have found   it  necessary  to  single  out  Schmitt  for  attack,’  a  need they

’ Sec  So m ucl  Weber,  “Ta k ing  F.xception   to  Decision:  We ltcr  Ben]am in
nâ Carl Schm itt,” diac.ritic  zz,  nos. 3—q (Fall  Winter  i 99a), pp. 5— i 8. A con tro-
vcrsy around  this and  other issues was set off by  EH en  Kc nnedy, “Car1  Schm itt
and  the Fran k I u rt School,” Tc/oi  y i  (Spri rig  i 9b2 ), pp. 32—66, and  the responses I rom  Martin  Jay,  Alions Sollner,  and  Ulrich  I° reuss  that  lollo w  in the  same issue.
Kennel y’s re joincter appears in the Fall ' 9*7 •sue. It appears ia i rly obvious that kenned y  has  successfully  established  the  debt  owed  by  most  mc nibe rs  of  the Iran k fur t School, incl uclinp Habermas, to Schmitt.
6 As Stephen Holmes caustically remarks, the editors of Telos spoke of
learning from, not about, C..arl Sch mitt. See Stephen Holmes, The Anatom y of Antiliberalism  (Cambria ge:  Harvard  University  Press,  i g93),  p.  )y.  The   reference is to Paul Piccone and G. L. Ulmen, “I ntroduction to Carl Schmitt,” below jz (Summer i9 ›). ‹
Stephen  Holmes,  as  far  back  mls  1983, spoke  in  a  rev icw  of Bendersky’s
biography of Schmitt as a man “who consciously  c mbraccd cvil.” American  Poli°ti°- cal Science Reuiew yy, no. 3 (September, i 9b3), p.  io6y. He  devotes  a  nasty  cha pter to Schmitt in The Anaiom y of Anti libet alism . Richard Rellamy and  Peter  Bach r devote  over  twenty  pages  to  Sch mitt  only  to  hnd  his   work   “unconvi ncing.” “Cart Schmitt and the Contradictions of Liberal Democracy,” European Journal
of  Politic‹il  Research  • 3 I'993).  PP   '* 3— I 8$. Giovanni  Sartori,  in  a contribution
to the initial issue of the Journal of Theoretical Politics (“The Essence of the Political in Carl Schmitt,” i , no. i ( i 9b9], pp. 6q—/5), feels the  need  to deme nd  a  more peaceful conception of politics against that which he finds in Sch mitt. J urgen Habermas, in “The Horrors of A utonomy: Carl Schmitt in English,” T£e New Conservatism (Cambridgc: MIT Press, i 992, pp. i z8— i 39)  links  Schmitt  to  the French and English-language post mode mists  whom  he  detests,  as  well  as  to  those in Gc rmany who  seek  to  find  a  continuity  in  German  history.  Habermas,  “Le besoin d’u ne continuité allemande: Carl  Schmitt  dans  1’histoire  des  iclées  poli- tiques de la  RFA,”  Les temps modernes,  n•   57s ( June    94).  pp. z6— 35.  More
xii	Tracy B. Strong
do not feel with other critics of liberal parliamentarism who were members of the Nazi Party. By virtue of the range of those to whom he appeals and the depth of his political allegiance during the Nazi era, Schmitt comes close these days to being the Martin Heidegger of political theory.8
I cannot here do more than to call attention to these facts.9 If a deﬁnition of an important thinker is to have a manifold of supporters and detractors,10 the scholars I have cited clearly show Schmitt a thinker to be taken seriously.  This is new.  Entries in   a standard reference work, The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Politi- cal Thought, published in 1987, go from “Schiller, Friedrich” to “Schumpeter, Joseph.” No Carl Schmitt. Yet recent years have seen an explosion of work on Schmitt, in English-speaking countries as well as in Germany.11 A question thus accompanies the welcome

sympathetic, Chantal Mouffe ﬁnds him “an adversary as rigorous as he is insight- ful,” in “Penser la démocratie moderne avec, et contre, Carl Schmitt,” Revue française de science politique 42, no. 1 (February 1992), p. 83. A computer search of the holdings of a research university library on Schmitt comes up with sixty-three journal articles in the last ﬁve years as well as thirty-six books published since 1980, most of them since 1990. By comparison, the search reveals 164 articles on Heidegger, and twenty-six on Hitler.
8 Around the time they both joined the Nazi Party, Schmitt initiated
contact with Heidegger by sending him a copy of The Concept of the Political. Hei- degger responded warmly and indicated that he hoped Schmitt would assist him in “reconstituting the Law Faculty.” This  letter  appears  on  p.  132  of  the Telos issue cited above. Schmitt, Heidegger, and Bäumler were the three most prominent German intellectuals to join the party.
9 Accounts of it may be found in the excellent Gottfried, Carl Schmitt, chaps. 1 and 5; George Schwab, The Challenge of the Exception, 2d ed. (New York: Greenwood Press, 1989), Conclusion; a right-wing appreciation of this can be found in Arnim Mohler, “Schmittistes de droite, Schmittistes de gauche, et Schmittistes établis,” Nouvelle ecole 44 (Spring 1987), pp. 29–66.
10 For this argument see my Jean-Jacques Rousseau: The Politics of the Ordinary (SAGE, 1994), chap. 1.
11 MIT Press has brought out in recent years translations of Political The- ology (1985), The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy (1986), and Political Romanti- cism (1986).
Fot chord	xiii
reissuing of Schmitt’s The Concept of the Political. What is the significance of the rebirth of interest in Schmitt, a leading conser va- tive jurist during the Weimar Republic, a scholar severely compro- mised by his participation in  and  support  for  the  Nazi  regime? Why is he now a focus  for  contention?  What  do  we  learn  about our intellectual interests and problems in the attention  now  being paid to Carl Schmitt!
The intense and renewed attention to the work  of  Carl Schmitt, whether hostile or  favorable,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he sits at the intersection of three central questions which any contem- porary political theorist must consider. The first is the relation between liberalism and democracy. The second is the relation be- tween politics and ethics. The third is the importance  of  what Schmitt called “enemies” for state  legitimation  and  the implication of that importance for the relation between domestic and interna- tional politics. His understandings of these questions raise a final issue, which c{uietly frames all  of  the  others;  it  has  to  do  with  the nature and consequence of the growing distance between the contemporary world  and  the  events   associated   with   the  advent of Nazism. I want here to examine each of the questions, both substantively and in terms of their interest and challenge to the various schools of  thought  that  take Schmitt seriously.  I am going to call these schools “left,” “right,” and “liberal.” I do so with the recognition that these terms  may  be  outmoded  and  even  a  source of confusion in our world.


The Relation between Liberalism and Democracy
Schmitt’s conception of the political stands  in  opposition  to his conception of “political romanticism,” the subject of one of his early books. Political romanticism is characterized as a stance of occasionalist ironism, such that there is no last word on anything. Political romanticism is the doctrine of the autonomous, isolated,
xiv	Tracy B. Strong
and solitary individual,  whose absolute  stance  toward  himself gives a world in which nothing is connecting to anything else. Political romanticism is thus at the root of what Schmitt sees as the liberal tendency to substitute perpetual  discussion  for  the  political."  On the positive side, Schmitt’s conception of the political stands in alliance with the subject of his subsequent book, Politics 1 Theology. There he elaborates a conception of sovereignty as the making of decisions which concern the exception."  The  political  is  the  arena of authority rather than general  law  and requires  decisions  which are singular, absolute and final.” Thus, as Schmitt notes in Political Theology, the sovereign decision has the quality of being something like a religious miracle: it  has no  references  except  the fact  that  it is, to what Heidegger would have called its Demin. (It  should  be noted that the sovereign is not like God: there i no “Sovereign.” Rather, sovereign acts have the quality of referring only to them- selves, as moments of “existential intervention.”)”
This is, for Schmitt, a given quality of “the political.” What distresses him is that the historical conjunction of liberalism and democracy has obscured this conception, such that we are in danger of losing the experience of the political. In 77ir Concept of the Political Schmitt identifies this loss of the conception of the political with the triumph of the modern notion of politics, dating loosely from the French Revolution but already present in seventeenth- century doctrines such as those of Cardinal Bellarmine, whose theory of indirect powers Hobbes went to extended pains to attack in chapter 4 i of Levlathan. Politics thus involves, famously, friends

See roe Concept of the Political (henceforth CP), below, p. J i .
” Cf Karl Lowith, “Le décisionisme  (occasionnel)  de  Carl  Schmitt,”  Lr temps modernes, cv. 5qq (November i 99 i), pp. i y—§o. The publishing history of Lowith’s text is given on page i§.
For a discussion of the influence of Kier kegaa rd on Schmitt, see Lowith,
ibid., pp. ig—zi.
See Fallen  Kennedy, “Carl Schmitt and the Frankfurt School: A Rejoin-
der,” Tenor y 3 (Fall ig8y), pp. io5, i oy.
Foretuot d	xv
and enemies, which means at least the centrality of  those  who are with you and those against whom you struggle. Fighting and the possibility of death are necessary for there to be the political."
From this standpoint, Schmitt came to the following conclu- sions about modern bourgeois politics. First, it is  a  system  which rests on compromise; hence all of its solutions are in the end temporary, occasional, never decisive. Second,  such  arrangements can never resolve the  claims  of  equality  inherent  in  democracy.  By the universalism implicit in its claims for equality, democracy challenges the legitimacy of the political order, as liberal legitimacy rests on discuss ion and the compromise of shifting majority rules. Third, liberalism will tend to undermine the possibility  of  the political in that it wishes to substitute procedure for struggle. Th us, last, legitimacy and legality  cannot  be the same; indeed,  they  stand in contradiction to each other."
The driving force behind this argument lies in its claim that politics cannot be made safe and that the attempt  to  make  politics safe will result in the abandonment of the state  to private  interests and to “society.” The reality of an empirical referent for this claim was undeniable in the experience of Weimar. (It is worth remem- bering that  Schmitt was  among  those  who  sought  to  strengthen the Weimar regime by  trying  to  persuade  Hindenburg  to  invoke the temporary dictatorial powers of article 48 against the extremes
on the Right and the Left.)"
There is here, however, a deeper claim, a claim that the political defines what it is to be a  human  being  in  the  modern world and that those who would diminish the political diminish humanity. Schmitt lays this out  as  the  “friend-enemy”  distinction. What  is  important  about  this distinction  is not sC›  much  the  “who

'’ I  have  loosely  followed   here  the  excellent  analysis  in  Kennel y, "I’elos

' As Paul Piccone and Ci. L,. Ulmen point  out  to Jeffrey  Herf in  “Reading and Misreading Schmitt,” Te/or yq (W inter ig8y—88), pp. i 33— igo.
xvi	Tracy  B. Strong
is on my side” quality, but the claim that only by means of this distinction does the question of our willingness to  take  responsi- bility for our own lives arise. “Each  participant  is  in  a  position  to judge whether  the  adversary   intends  to  negate  his  opponent’s   way of life and  therefore  must  be  repulsed  or fought in order to preserve
one’s  oon    form   of  rzirfenre.   ’9   I t  is   this  quality   that   attracts the
nonliberal Left and the Right to  Schmitt.  It  is  precisely  to  deny that the stakes of politics should be so high that liberals resist  Schmitt. lf a liberal is  a  person  who cannot  take  his  own  side  in an argument, a liberal is also a person who,  as  Schmitt  notes, thereby raising the stakes, if asked “ ‘Christ or Barabbas?’ [re- sponds]   with   a   proposal   to  adjourn  or  appoint  a  committee   of
investigation. *0

The	Relation between Politics and Ethics
Schmitt claimed that liberalism’s reliance on procedure  led to a depoliticization and dehumanization of the world. It was the daring of the claim for  the political  that drew Leo Strauss’s  atten-
tion in the critique he wrote of The Conrep/ off/te Pofifirnf $£l i 932. Schmitt  had  written:  “The  political  adversaries  of  a  clear political
theory will ... easily refute political phenomena and truths  in the name of some autonomous discipline as amoral, uneconomical, unscientific and above all declare this—and this is politically rele- vant—a devil ry worthy of being combated.” ’ Schmitt’s claim  was not just that the political was a separate realm of human activity, parallel  to ethics, economics,  science, and  religion,  but  that inquiry


'	°7 i y italics).
" Carl Schmitt, The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 9*5). r *•
" CP 65—66.
Foreword	xvii
into the political was an inquiry into the “order of human things,” where the important word is “human.””
To claim this was to claim that the possibility of dying for what one was was the final determining quality of the human. Schmitt’s existential Hobbesianism thus saw moral claims as im- plicitly denying the finality of death in favor of an abstract univer- salism in which human beings were not particularly involved in what they were. As Herbert Marcuse noted, “Carl Schmitt inquires into the reason for such sacrifice: ‘There is no rational end, no norm however correct, no program however exemplary, no social ideal however beautiful, and no legitimacy or legality that could justify men’s killing one another.’ What, then, remains as a possible justification! Only this: that there is a state Of affairs that through its very existence and presence is exempt from all justification, i.e. an ‘existential,’ ‘ontological’ state of affairs,—justification by mere existence.”” It is this quality in Schmitt that is at the basis of the accusations of irrationalism and decisionism.”
Two questions are at stake here. The first is whether it is possible to escape the hold of an ethical universalism;  the second  is that if it is possible, where then does one find oneself what does it mean to go “beyond good and evil” ! Schmitt clearly thought that he had given a positive answer to the first question: that  people will only be responsible for what they are if the  reality of death  and  conflict  remain  present.2’  Such considerations transcend  the

"  Leo Strauss,  Notes on Carl  Schmitt, The Con«pt  of the Political (hence-
forth NCP), below, par. i.
" Herbert Mar cuse, Negations (Boston: Beacon, i 968), pp. 3o—) i . Martin Jay, quite unfairly, adduces this essay to claim against Ellen Ke nned y that Marcuse was fundamentally hostile to Schmitt. Scc note § above.
’^ Richard Wolin extends Habermas’s critic}ue and claims that Sc hmitt’s critique of libe ralism has “its bas is in the vitalist critique of F.nligh ten ment ratio- nalism.”  (“Carl   Schmitt,   the  Conservative   Revolutions r y:  Habit us  and   the  Aes-
thetics of Horror,”  Political  Thcory  zo, no. 3 (August  i 99z), pp. 424-447, at q3z. "  CP  yJ. For an  exploration  of  the  relation  of Schmitt  to Max Weber on
xviii	Tracy B. Strong
ethical and place one—this is Schmitt’s answer to the second ques- tion—in the realm of nature. As Strauss  notes:  “Schmitt  returns, contrary to liberalism, to its  author,  Hobbes,  in  order  to  strike  at the root of liberalism in Hobbes’s express negation  of  the  state  of nature. 2‘
However, as Strauss brilliantly shows, it is highly contestable that Schmitt actually has achieved what he believes himself to have accomplished. Strauss demonstrates that Schmitt  remains  con- cerned with the meaningfulness of life—he is afraid that modernity will make life unmeaningful. He thus, as Strauss concludes, re- mains within the horizon of  liberal  moralist.  “The  affirmation  of the political,”  writes  Strauss,  “is  ultimately   nothing  other   than the affirmation of the moral.”*’ Schmitt has, albeit un willingly, moralized even his would-be amorality.
It is out of the scope of this foreword to indicate how Schmitt might have  done  otherwise.  Strauss  indicates  that  Schmitt   has merely prepared the way for a radical critique of liberalism. How- ever, Schmitt “is tying himself to his opponents’ view of morality instead of questioning the  claim  of  humanitarian-pacifist  morality to be morals; he remains  trapped  in the view that he is attacking.”*’  It is important to note that the nature  of  Strauss’s  critique  of Schmitt indicates that whatever his own  critique  of liberalism  will be, it  cannot be  a  simple  reaffirmation  of  moral  truths.  Rather (and all too gnomically) “IT Is O uNDERSTAND SOCRATES,” as the highlighted  words  beginning  the Introduction  and chapters 3 and
4 of Stra uss’s Natural Right and History (a book overtly about liberalism  and   not  Socrates)  let  us  know.2'   One  should  also note

these  matters,  see  W.  J. Mommsen, Max  Weber and  German  Politics,  i S9o— igzo
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, i g8q), esp. pP  3*9 ff. " NCl’, par. i q.
*’ NCI°,  par. z2.
*' NCP, par. 3o.
” On these matters see the excellent boc*k by Heinrich  Meier, Carl Schmitt arid Leo Strauss (Chicago: University of Chicago I°ress, 99s), esp. p. 86. The
Foreword	xix

here, as Heinrich Meier points out, that Schmitt never engaged in a full-fledged confrontation with Nietzsche."
To some of those on the Left, Schmitt’s according of primacy
to the political thus appears to open the door to a kind of postmod- ernism.’' Here, his insistence on the centrality of antagonistic rela- tions and his resistance to an abstract, not to say “thin,” under- standing of agency fit in well with those who see liberalism as a historical event. To see liberalism as a historical event means that one understands it as the inheritor and bearer not only of  rights and freedoms but also of structures of power and domination, of colonial and class exploitations, of the hatred of, rather than the opposition to, the Other.’*
Such  a   response   to  Schmitt   is,  however,  a  highly selective
choice of some elements of his doctrine. It tacitly  introduces  ele- ments of democracy by pluralizing his notion of sovereignty a nd suggesting that the decision about the  exception  is  a  decision  that each person can make. I t is to claim that value-pluralism is not inherently   undesirable.’’  Against   this  one  can   insist   that Schmitt,
other chapters in Natural Right and History all begin with the word “’J’he.” for a critique of‘ the Strauss critique of Schmitt, see John P. McCormic k, “F'ear, Technology, and the State: Carl Schmitt,  Leo Strauss, anct  the  Revival  of Hobbes in Weimar and National Socialist Ciermany,” Political Theory zz, no. q (November
'994)' PP    '9	5°
See Meier, C.arl Schmitt and Neo Strauss, p. 65, n. 2z. Wolin, Political Theory zo, no. 3, finds strongly Nietzschean elements in Schmitt.  However,  the elements that he finds are simply the same ones that he dislikes in Schmitt.
’’ See Piccone and U lmen, Te/oi yq, p. i 3S.
See William Connolly, “Beyond €iood and Evil: The Ethical Sensibility of Michcl Fouca ult,” Political Theot y 2 i , no. 3 (August i 993), pp. 3fi5—3b9.  A similar theme, with  different  politics,  may  be  louncl  in  Vilmos  Holczha user, Konsens und Kanfli)t: Dtie Regriffe des Poli tiscben bei  C it 1 Schmitt (Berlin: Duncker & H umblot, i989).
” A fact also noted by Ellen Kcnnccly, in  Te/oi  y3, p. 66; and  by Steven Lu kes (in critic{ue of Habermas), “Of  Plods  and  Demons,”  in  Dav ic1  Held  and John B. Thompson, Habermas. Critical Debates (I.ondon: Macmillan, i 9hz), Also
cited by Kennedy.
XX	Tracy B. Strong
no matter what else he m ight be, was not a democrat. He did not conceive sovereignty as something each individual might have but rather as the exercise of  power  by  the  state.  It  is  to  this  central and “tough” notion of sovereignty that conservatives respond. The question raised here is whether one can accept  the formulations  of The Concept of the Political as (in Schmitt’s words) “the starting  point for objective discussion” and not emerge from them in the direction that Leo Strauss took.” I leave unanswered  and  barely asked if there could be a Straussianism of the Left in America, an alliance of Berkeley and Chicago, as it were.”

Legitimation and Enemies
In The Concept of the Political, Schmitt identifies as the “high points of politics” those moments in which “the enemy is, in  con- crete clarity, recognized as the enemy.”  He  suggests  that  this  is true both theoretically and in practice." There  are  two  aspects  of this claim worthy of note. The first is the semi-Hegelian form it assumes. The concrete recognition of the other as enemy and the consequent establishment of one’s own identity  sounds  something like Hegel’s Master and Slave, especially if read through a Kojevian lens. I suspect, in fact, that it is this aspect which led the SS journal Dan Schwarze Korps to accuse Schmitt of neo-Hegelianism.”
But only the form is Hegelian. There are two elements in Schmitt’s cla inn about enemies which are not Hegelian. first is a suggestion that unless one is clear about the fundamental non ratio-

” For some prelirninar y  ideas  see Gourevitch  and  Roth,  “I ntroduction,” to Leo Strauss, On T yran n y, as well as the material from Strauss and Ko jéve in that book.
" 1 fincl that Holmes, Anaiom y of Antiliberalism, p. S8, raises and dismisses
the question about Alasdair Macl ntyre.
“	* *7 See the discussion in Meier, Carl Sch mitt and I.eo Strause,
pp. zS ff.
” See Gottfried, Carl Schmitt, p. 3i ; Bendersky, Carl Schmitt, pp. 2qo ff.
Forewotd	xxi
nality of politics, one will likely be overtaken by events. Following the passage about the “high points of politics,” Schmitt  goes on  to give examples of those who were clear about what was friend and enemy and those who were not. He cites as clear-headed  some Cierman opponents of Napoleon; Lenin in his condemnation of capitalism; and—most strik ingly—Cromwell in his enmity to- ward Spain. He contrasts these men to “the loomed classes [who] romanticized the Russian peasant,”  and  to  the  “aristocratic  society in  France  before  the  Revolution  of  i yS9 [who] sentimentalized
‘man who is by nature good.’ ””  The  implication  here is that ratio-
nality—what is rational for a group to do to preserve itself as a group—is not  only  not  universal  but  hard  to  know.  We  are  not far here from Alastair Mac I ntyre’s Whose Justice? Whose Rational- ity?” The important aspect to Schmitt’s claim is  that it  is by  facing the friend-enemy distinction that we (a  “we”)  will  be  able  to  be clear about what  “we”  are  and  what  it  is  “rational”  for  “us”  to  do.
Schmitt insists in his discussion of the friend -enemy distinc-
tion on the public nature of the categories. It is not  my  enemy  but our enemy; that is, “enemy” is a political concept. Here Schmitt enlists the public quality to politics in order to prevent a  universal- ism which he thinks extremely dangerous. The argument goes  like this. Resistance to or the refusal to accept the fact that one’s rational action has limitations determined by the quality of the identity  of one’s group leads to two possible outcomes.
The first is that one assumes one shares with others universal qualities which must then “naturally” engender an ultimate con- vergence  of  interests  attainable   through   negotiation  and  compro-


"  CP  68.  See  Bellamy  and  Baehr, European  Journal  of  Politic‹il !esciit‘‹h
z3, pp. 180 ff.
”  See    Alasdair    Maclntyre,   Whole   Justice?   Whase    Rationa lit y? (Notre
Liame:  University  of Notre  Dame  Press, i 9    ). Holmes, Analom y of Antiliberalism,
p. 88, d raws attention to this possible link.
xxii	Tracy  B. Strong
mise. Here events  are most  likely  not  only  to  prove one  wrong but to destroy a group  that acts on such a  false  belief.  (One thinks of Mar x’s caustic comments about the social-democrats in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Eouis Napoleon). This is the case with the “doomed”  Russian  classes  and  the “aristocratic  society”  of France.
The other, more dangerous possibility  is that one  will  claim  to speak in the name of universal humanity. In such a case, all those by whom one is opposed must perforce be seen as speaking against humanity and hence can only merit to be exterminated. Schmitt writes:

Humanity as such and as a whole has no enemies. Everyone be- longs to humanity . “Humanity” thus becomes an asymmetrical counter-concept. If he discriminates within humanity and thereby denies the quality of being human to a disturber or destroyer, then the negatively valued person becomes an unperson, and his life is no longer of  the highest value: it becomes worthless and must be destroyed. Concepts such as “human being” thus contain the possibility of the deepest  inequality and become thereby “asymmetrical.””

These words  were written in  i 9y6, but they  were prepared
for in the conclusion to The Concept of the Politi'cal: “The adversary is thus no longer called an enemy but a disturbe r of peace and is thereby designated to be an outlaw of humanity.””  Schmitt  wants here to remove from politics, especially international  politics  but also internal politics of an ideological k ind, any possibility of justi- fying one’s action on the basis of a claim to universal moral princi- ples. He does so because he fears that in such a  framework  all  claims to good will recognize no limits  to  their  reach.  And,  thus, this century will see “wars for the domination of the earth”  (the phrase  is  Nietzsche’s   in  Ecce  Homo),  that  is,  wars  to  determine



p. 88.

Carl Sch mitt, “The I.egal World Revolution,” Telos yz (Summer 9*7).

CP 79› ° f CP 3q ff.
Foreword	extii
once and for all what  is good  for all, wars  with no outcome except an end to politics and the elimination of all difference.
On a first level, the question that Schmitt poses here is whether liberalism can meet the challenges posed by international politics.’* Rousseau suggested that a country would be better off avoiding international politics; Hobbes made no attempt to extend the notion of sovereignty beyond state borders.  Any  answer  to this question must deal with the fact that this century has seen not only the d ramatic extension of countries claiming to adhere to universal values but also unprecedented attempts at local and uni- versal genocide and the development of extremely aggressive re- gionalisms. For Schmitt these all went together. He thought there was no natural limit to what one m ight do to make the world safe for liberalism. The evidence is mixed.
On a second level, one  must  ask  how  a  man  who  wrote with some eloquence about the dangers of universalism could have written what he wrote in support of Nazi policies. Three possible answers present themselves. The first  is  that  he  was  morally blinded by ambition—that he would say what  was  necessary  to attain and remain in prestigious  posts.  The second  is  that  he  did not understand what the Nazis were doing. The last  is  that  he thought (or persuaded himself for some period of time) that the opponents of the  regime  were, in fact, enemies,  who, in fact,  posed  a threat to the  German  identity.  If  the  last  is  true, as  I  believe  it to  be,  then   what   needs  attention   in  Schmitt’s   theory   is  not the

’* Questions also raised by scholars likc Hans Mor genthau, whose early work in Germany focused on the political (and not legal) equality of international relations;  and  Henry  Kissinger,  whose  The  Necessity  for  C.hoice  (New  York:
Harper,  i 96 i) and  “The  White  Revolution a ry:  Reflections on  Bismarck,” Daeda  -
“' 97. •• . 3 (Summer i 9GS), pp. 888—9zj , while not mentioning Sch mitt, clearly draw  on  him, as  did  some of  Kissingcr’s  practice  as  a statesman.  Note  the parallel
title in Wolin’s article, “Carl Schmitt,  the  Conser vative  heyolutionary.”  See Al- fons Soll ner, “German Conser vativism in America: Morgenthau’s I°o1itica1 Real- ism,” Telos yz (Summer 9 7). . 161 — 17°
xxiv	Tracy B. Strong
attack on universalism but the overly simplistic notion of friend. There is a way in which Schmitt allowed his notion of enemy to generate his idea of friend.43

Schmitt and Nazism
Does one’s judgment on Schmitt come down to the way one reads the facts of Schmitt’s adherence to the Nazi Party? Among his more sympathetic commentators there is a tendency to apolo- gize and excuse. At least one response given by those who sympa- thize with Schmitt’s work will not do. This is the one repeated by the editors of Telos to Professor Jeffrey Herf: they rehearse answers like that of Paul Tillich, who responded to a student who objected to Heidegger on the grounds of his participation in the Nazi party by pointing out that Plato had after all served the tyrant Dionysos of Syracuse and we do not therefore refrain from reading him.44 While the quality of a person’s thought can in no way be reduced to a person’s actions, this is only because no action admits, in a mo- ment, of only the meaning that time will give to it. One cannot sim- ply draw a line between thought and life as if choices in life could be judged by criteria foreign to thought. Context matters, and not in a self-evident way.45 However, to ask the question of what Schmitt thought he was doing—his intentions—can also not be ﬁ- nal. To understand everything is precisely not to excuse it. Purity of intentions matters for little and is often dangerous in politics.46

43 See Jacques Derrida, The Politics of Friendship (Verso. London and New York, 1997), p. 106 and chapters four and ﬁve, passim.
44 Telos 74 (Winter 1987– 88), p. 140.
45 For a revelatory discussion of this matter in relation to the case of Heidegger’s silences on himself, see Babette Babich, “The Ethical Alpha and the Linguistic Omega: Heidegger’s Anti-Semitism and the Inner Afﬁnity between Germany and Greece,” in her Words in Blood, Like Flowers (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2006), pp. 227 –242.
46 This was the point of Max Weber’s essay “Politics as a Vocation.” See Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem (New York: Viking, 1964), Epilogue.
Foreword	xxv
It seems to me relatively clear that in most aspects of his thought Schmitt’s understanding of law and the world did not change throughout his life. This includes at least some aspects of his open anti-Semitism during the period 1933 – 36.47 Frightening in Schmitt’s case is the possibility that precisely what many ﬁnd attractive in Schmitt must open, while not requiring them to take, the possibility of the route he took. I want brieﬂy to suggest that this is a question we must face. Consider the possibilities.
The approach taken by Strauss and Meier consists in argu- ing that Schmitt, while attempting a radical critique of liberalism, remains within the liberal framework. (Such an accusation is sim- ilar to the one Heidegger makes about Nietzsche as attempting a radical critique of Western metaphysics while remaining in the metaphysical framework.) The implication therefore is that the choices Schmitt makes are not excluded by the liberal framework; that is, they take place in the terms allowed by that framework. The question here becomes the manner in which one can mitigate the dangerous possibilities inherent in liberalism, since for the his- torical present and apparent future no alternative is available. The commitment to liberalism is thus instrumental.
The position taken by the contributors to Telos as well as many of Schmitt’s other English-language defenders derives from the feeling that the liberal tradition no longer offers the intellec- tual resources to meet the challenges (especially those of techno- logical domination and bureaucratized capitalism) of the modern world. Central to this pressing need for new theoretical resources is the collapse of Marxism as a viable ﬁrst-world theoretical
47 See Nicolaus Sombart, Die deutschen Männer und ihre Feinde: Carl Schmitt, ein deutsches Schicksal zwischen Männerbund und Matriarchatsmythos (Mu- nich: Hanser Verlag, 1991). I owe this reference to Holmes, Anatomy of Antiliber- alism, and I share his anxiety about the psychoanalytic elements of Sombart’s book as practiced on Schmitt. The most searching discussion of Schmitt’s anti-Semitic writings and activities is Jacob Taubes, Ad Carl Schmitt: Gegenstrebige Fügung (Berlin: Merve Verlag, 1987). Taubes calls Schmitt “an apocalyptic of the Counter- revolution” (p. 7).
xxvi	Tracy B. Strong
stance. In this perspective, the preservation of (and, indeed, em- phasis on) the forms of liberal institutions further undermines  the values those institutions were originally supposed to promote. (This was the gist of Schmitt’s analysis also, of course.) Here the rejection of liberal structures is made in the name of (more or less) liberal values. But the only structure proposed is a kinder and gentler antagonistics than the existentially intense ones in Schmitt.
Liberals are horriﬁed at Schmitt because he offends against one of the deepest premises of liberalism: politics is necessary but should not become too serious. As Robert Lane wrote a long time ago, liberal politics requires “a touch of anomie” about the public sphere.48 Most important, liberal politics take the form of claim- ing that politics should never be about identity and that to the de- gree that policy decisions affect what it means to be a person those decisions are divisive and dangerous. For liberals, rights are rights no matter how gained: they have little truck with the claim of what one might call Schmitt-leaning democrats that rights are not rights unless they are fought for and won, such that they become our rights.49
Why these reactions now? There is no question but that the Left and the Right are, in their interest in Schmitt, responding to a perceived need to ﬁnd other sources for political theorizing.50 Clearly there is a sense that the political categories imposed on us

48 Robert Lane, Political Ideology (Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1962), p. 249. I believe I owe this reference and my ﬁrst epigraph to my ancient friendship with Bruce Payne.
49 See Sheldon S. Wolin, Review of John Rawls, Political Liberalism, forth- coming in Political Theory 24, no. 1 (February 1996).
50 Telos continues to look to the right. The Summer 1994 issue is devoted to the writings of Alain de Benoist, a leading theoretician of the New French Right. The progressive Left (Benjamin Barber, Charles Taylor) ﬁnds sustenance in de Maistre and Herder. The Right becomes ever more Nietzschean in its condemnation of liberal society.
Foreword	xxvii
by the relation to the monarchy of various parts of the 1791 French National Assembly have played their way out in the face of modern technologically and rationalized industrial society.
There is also another reason, this one more generational. An intellectual consequence of the experience with Nazism was to effectively shrink, perhaps one might say homogenize, the lan- guage and terms of political debate in the subsequent period. As the Nazi experience fades from consciousness (at just over sixty years of age, I am among the last to have been born during the war and to have been taught by those with adult consciousness during the war), so also possibilities excluded by the specter of Auschwitz have returned. The revival of interest in Schmitt is consequent, I believe, to this increasing distance from the 1930s. How we manage the intellectual terrain that we are opening up is our responsibility.

Notes on “The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations”
At a conference in Barcelona, Spain, in 1929, Carl Schmitt gave a lecture on the topic of “The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations.” The lecture was published in 1930 and was added to the edition of The Concept of the Political when it ap- peared in 1932. Schmitt thus thought of it as part of his general argument in that book; it is appropriate and important that it ap- pear in this expanded edition.1
As noted, a central theme to The Concept of the Political is the “friend-foe” distinction, a distinction that serves as the quasi- transcendental presupposition of the political. As the political is for Schmitt the realm of that which is truly human,2 his distress is that the West is losing touch with that which gives life human meaning. The argument he develops in the Barcelona lecture pre-

1 The ﬁne translation is by John McCormick. I call attention to his ﬁne in- troduction to his translation in Telos 2, no. 26 (1993): pp. 119 –129.
2 NCP, par. 1.
xxviii	Tracy B. Strong
sents the West as standing at the most recent of a series of “cen- tral domains of thought.” “Central domains” play here pretty much the same role for Schmitt as paradigms do for Thomas Kuhn.3 Thus: “If a domain of thought becomes central, then the problems of other domains are solved in terms of the central do- mains—they are considered secondary problems, whose solution follows as a matter of course only if the problems of the central domain are solved” (“The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliti- cizations,” p. 86). In the modern West, Schmitt sees danger in the increasing sense of the State as just “a huge industrial plant.”4 In- creasingly this plant “runs by itself . . . [and] the decisionistic and personalistic element in the concept of sovereignty is lost.”5 Schmitt’s task is to recover this element in contemporary times.
There have been ﬁve domains since the Renaissance, each loosely identiﬁed with a century. As he lays it out in the Barcelona lecture, the history of the last ﬁve hundred years in the West shows a common structure: as the controlling force has changed, so also have what counts as evidence, as well as what was the so- cial and political elite. Thus in the sixteenth century the world was structured around an explicitly theological understanding with God and the scriptures as foundational certainties; this was replaced in the next century by metaphysics and rational (“scien- tiﬁc”) research and in the eighteenth by ethical humanism with its central notions of duty and virtue. In the nineteenth century eco- nomics comes to dominate (although Schmitt is seen as a man of the Right he always took Marx completely seriously), and, ﬁnally, in the twentieth century technicity is the ordering of the day. And this is at the core of his claim that ours is an age of “neutraliza-

3 Thomas H. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions (Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 1970).
4 Carl Schmitt, Political Theology (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2005), p. 65.
5 Ibid., p. 48.
Foreword	xxix
tion and depoliticization”: whereas all previous eras had leaders and decision makers—what he calls clercs—the era of technology and technological progress has no need of individual persons.6
Schmitt uses the French clerc and no doubt has in mind the 1927 book by Julien Benda, La trahison des clercs (The Betrayal of the Intellectuals).7 But whereas Benda had seen the clercs as turn- ing away from spiritual and eternal values to temporal and polit- ical activity, Schmitt, tacitly opposing Benda, sees the clerc as the person who most centrally grasps and formulates the core of a particular central domain.8
The central quality of all transformations that have led to our present stage—technicity—is the “striving for a neutral do- main.” For Europe, the attraction of a neutral domain is that it seems to provide a solution to the conﬂicts that had grown up out of quarrels over theology. It transformed the concepts elaborated by “centuries of theological reﬂection” into what are for Schmitt “merely private matters” (AND, 90). However, each stage of neu- tralization became, in Schmitt’s analysis, merely the next arena of struggle. Here it is important to see that what someone like John Rawls sees as one of the most important achievements of the West—religious toleration—is for Schmitt merely the prelude to another form of conﬂict.

6 This periodization can also be found in shorter form in the 1934 preface to Political Theology, pp. 1–2. The stages are well discussed in Henning Ottmann, “Das Zeitalter der Neutralisierungen und EntTotalisierungen: Carl Schmitts The- orie der Neuzeit,” in Reinhard Mehring, ed. Carl Schmitt: Der Begriff des Politis- chen; Ein Kooperativer Kommentar (Berlin: Akademie Verlag., 2003), pp. 156 –169. See the more extensive discussion in my foreword to Political Theology.
7 A contemporary edition is Julien Benda, La trahison des clercs (Les cahiers rouges: Grasset, 2003).
8 Thus Jacob Taubes, one of the most insightful readers of Schmitt, can write about Schmitt in The Political Theology of Paul (Stanford: Stanford Univer- sity Press, 2004), p. 103: “He is a clerk, and he understands his position to be not to establish the law but to interpret the law.”
xxx	Tracy B. Strong
The central question now, therefore, is what conﬂicts will arise when the central domain is technology, which, “precisely be- cause it serves all . . . is not neutral” (AND, 91). Here Schmitt ﬁnds himself in opposition to thinkers like Weber, Troeltsch, and Rathenau, whom he reads as succumbing to the “disenchantment of the world (Entzauberung der Welt).” If one follows them, Schmitt says, one will despair, for the world will appear only as what Weber called a “casing as hard as steel” with no way or even sight out.9 This leads to quietism, the most important danger now confronting Europe. This danger arises because it is Russia (i.e., the USSR) that has understood and seized technicity and made it its own in the new arena of conﬂict. Only in Russia does one now ﬁnd a sense of a new “strong politics.”
Schmitt writes somewhat chillingly in The Concept of the Political that “if a people no longer possesses the energy or the will to maintain itself in the sphere of politics, the latter will not thereby vanish from the world. Only a weak people will disap- pear.”10 He thus closes his article with a truncated citation from Vergil’s Fourth Eclogue: “Ab integro nascitur ordo.” This full line is “Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo,” which trans- lates as “a great order of the ages is born from the renewal.” Schmitt’s abbreviated line means “an order is born from the re- newal.” It is worth noting both that this line served as the origin for the motto on the Great Seal of the United States devised by Charles Thompson (an eminent Latinist), and that Vergil’s fol- lowing line speaks of the coming of a new child (understood by medieval Christianity to be a prophecy of the coming of Christ). Schmitt ends his posthumously published Glossarium with “With each newly born child a new world is born. God willing, each

9 Stahlhartes Gehäuse is Weber’s term (The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism [Penguin, 2002], p. 121) and has been usually misleadingly translated as “iron cage.”
10 The Concept of the Political, p. 53.
Foreword	xxxi
newly born child will be an aggressor!”11 The eloquent two clos- ing paragraphs of Schmitt’s Barcelona article are in effect a call for the West to be equal to the need for this renewed conﬂict and to oppose the forces of Communism. One can only imagine what he might say in the present age as the United States calls, in more or less explicitly theological terms, for a conﬂict between the West and “radical Islam.”12

11 Carl Schmitt, Glossarium (Berlin: Duncker und Humboldt, 1991, p. 320). 12 For an analysis of some of the dangers this gives rise to, see William Scheuerman, “Carl Schmitt and the Road to Abu Ghraib,” Constellations 13, no. 1
(2006): pp. 108 –124.

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE TO THE 1996 EDITION
For this editon, the translation of Leo Strauss’s “Anmer- kungen zu Carl Schmitt, Der Begrif des Politischen” has been re- printed from Heinrich Meier, Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: The Hidden Dialogue, translated by J. Harvey Lomax (Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 1995). My own Introduction to and translation of Schmitt’s essay are reprinted with minor corrections from Carl Schmitt, The Concept of the Political (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1976). Note 9 on page 6 refers to an earlier English version of the Strauss piece, not reproduced here. On page 10, line 17, on page 11, lines 2 and 3, and on page 14, line 3, I have inserted “militant” before “ideology” (pages 10 and 11) and before “political” (page 14) in order to better distinguish mil- itant forms of ideology from secular forms.
George Schwab

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In the process of translating this essay I was fortunate in having been able to consult Professor Schmitt at his home in West Germany. His fascination for the English language resulted in many hours of fruitful discussions on the meaning of words. In preparing this translation for publication I am grateful to my friend and colleague, Mr. Frank D. Grande, for his suggestions and comments and also to Mrs. Erna Hilfstein for the time which she has put at my disposal in aiding me with some technical de- tails. Of course, the sole responsibility for the translation rests upon the translator. For the grant advanced to complete this project I express my gratitude to the Research Foundation of The City University of New York.
George Schwab
The City College and
The City University of New York July 1975






THE CONCEPT OF THE POLITICAL




I NTRO DUCT I ON


I
The French political philosopher  Julien  Freund  has observed that “by a curious paradox the name Schmitt  is surrounded  by  mist, and it may be asked whether this fog is not often manufactured artificially.... It is fashionable to  discredit  the  work  of  this  author on the  basis  of  a  reputation  that  is  based  largely  on  rumors  ... [and]  it  is better  ...	to recognize that Carl Schmitt is controversial and will always remain controversial, like all those who belong to the same intellectual  family:  Machiavelli,  Hobbes,  de  Maistre, Donoso   Cortes,   and   also Max  Weber.	” '
Noone  indeed  has questioned  the  prolific ness of  Schmitt, and
few   have  questioned   the   profundity   of   his   writings.   But  his  de-
cision, after the Enabling Act of March 93s, to become the selt- appointed ideologue of the Nazis has made him so controversial ' that even today it is difficult to view his work objectively.’ The

' Preface to Francis Rosensticl’s Le Pri nci pe de  supranationalité:  Essai sur les rapports de la politique ct  du  droit  (Paris:  Editions  A.  Pedone,  i96z), pp. i•;—i6.
See George Schwab, “Carl Schmitt:  Political  Opportunist ?”  lntcllect, Vol. io3, NO. 2363 (February, 975). IP- 334—33›; also, George Schwab, Thc Challenge of the Exception: An Intt’oduction to the Political Ideas of Carl
«! !• *• <••• •9z r a md 936 (Berlin: Duncker & HumblOt, *97 ) . 13
•‹•.   •4o— i5o;   Helmut   Heiber,   Walter   Fran)   und   sein   Reichsi nstitut    fiir Gcschichtc dev seven Deutschlan ds (Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt,
i966)› P- 912.
° The animus against Schmitt is so great that in some circles it  is fashionable to omit his name even in scholarly publications, as though Schmitt
3
4	The Conce pt of the Political
problem of assessing Schmitt’s writings has been further complicated for English-speaking students because none of his works has previ- ously been translated into English.*
Carl Schmitt was born in iSSS into a family of devout Cath- olics in the predominantly Protestant town of Plettenberg in West- phalia. He received his initial formal education in a Catholic school. Later, while continuing his humanistic studies, he resided in a Catholic institution. Subsequently  he  studied  law  at  the  universities of Berlin and Strasbourg and  received  his doctorate  in  jurisprudence in iqio. After working as a law clerk, he entered the academic world and   taught  at  the  University  of  Strasbourg  in  iqi6, at  the Graduate
School of  Business Administration at Munich frOm  igi 9 tO 19°•, the
universities  of   Greifswald   in   i9z i,   Bonn  frOlTl  1922  tO  i 925, the
Graduate  School  of   Business   Administration  at  Berlin  from  iq2s
to   i 933,  and   the   universities  of   Cologne  in   iq33  and   Berlin  from
*933 tO I 945-
Schmitt’s early writings  reflect his consciousness of  the  Kultur-
)am pJ  controversy   which   had  occurred   just   prior   to  his  birth. He
had  never existed.  For example, as Dr. Han+Dietrich  Sander  has  pointed out
(Marxistische   Ideologie   und   allgemeine   Kunsttheorie,   znd   ed.   (Tubingen :
C. B. Mohr  [Paul  Sicbeck] ,  1975)  p.  i 73,  it  is  part  of  the  “intellectual civil  war of  our  time”  that  the footnotes  in  which  Walter  Benjamin  acknowl-
edged Schmitt’s influence on his tlrsprun g dev deutschen Trauerspiels were omitted by the editors, Theodor W. Adorno and Gretel Adorno, in  their two-volume edition of  Benjamin’s  work,  published  in  Frankfort  on  the  Main in  i 955. For  almost  complete  listings  of  Schmitt’s  works sec  Pict Tommisscn,
“Carl Schmitt  Bibliographie,”  Fcstschri|t  stir Carl  Sch miit  sum yo. Geburtstag,
ed. H. Barion,  E.  Forsthoff,  W.  Weber  (Berlin:  Duncker  6t  Humblot,  i 959), PP °75*°97. 3°3—3  q;  also,  Piet  Tommisscn,  “Erganzungsliste  zur  Carl Schmitt Bibliographic  vom Jahre i 9s9.”  E pirrhosis.‘  Feetgabc stir Carl Sch mitt,
ed. H. Barion,  E.-W.  Bockenfi›rde,  E.  Forstholf,  W.  Weber  (Berlin:  Dunckcr & Humblot, i968) , 11, ›4>U4
Some of Schmitt’s writings are alreatJ y available in French, Italian,
Japanese and Spanish.
^ For a detailed biographical sketch of Schmitt see Schwab, The Chal- lenge, pp. i 3—•
Introduction	5
was fascinated by and proud of the power the Catholic Church had exerted on so powerful a figure as Bismarck. This pride can be seen in his early conception of the state as an entity  whose  function  is  to realize right (Rech I) . And because of the universal nature of the
Catholic Church it was, according to Schmitt, in a better position to decide on what constitutes right than the many states then in existence.’
But World War I, Germany’s defeat, and the controversial
terms of the Versailles treaty produced a new political reality in Germany.  This  induced  Schmitt  to  focus  his  attention   on   some   of the concrete problems facing the Weimar republic.’

I I
Outraged at the treatment accorded to Germany by the victors, Schmitt, in his answers to concrete legal  questions, explored  some of the political implications of the new  reality. But  in  The  Concept  oJ the Political ' in particular—undoubtedly one of the most important tracts of political thought of the twentieth century—he raises the discussion to a level which transcends Weimar Germany in both space and time.
In  i 93°, the  late  Leo Strauss  commented  on  The   Conrrpi o/
the  Political,  and  his  comments  are  reproduced   at  the  end  of this
° Carl Schmitt, Der  Wert  dcs Siaaies und  dic Bcdcutun g des Einzelnen
(Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul SiebCCk l . '9'4). PP- °. dJ—q6, 95-
' For a discussion of  Schmitt’s  intellectual  heritage  and  also for  his shift of attention see Schwab, The Challenge, pp. i 8-28; also, Schwab, “Carl
Schmitt: Political Opportunist?” PP 334*335
" The   thesis  of  this  didactic  essay  appeared  originall     iR  *9° 2  Under  the
title   “Der   Begriff   des   Politischen”   in   Archiv    fiir   Sozial «'isscnscha|t und
Soziolpoliti §, Vol. s . No. i PP '—33 This essay was further elaborated and published in •93• under the same title by Duncker & H umblot, Munich. This translation is based on the text of thC I 9s  z  edition,  and  for  the  sake  or  brevity omits  Schmitt's   foreword,   three   corollaries,   and    references   which   he   added to
the 1963 edition.
6	The Concept of the Political
volume.' Here, however, I should like to  point  out  that  Schmitt raised the question : what is the modern European state ? In  his answer he attempted, on the one hand, to  derive  a  model  of this state, and, on the other, to focus particular attention on  the centrifu- gal forces within the state that were responsible for tearing it apart. Though this essay contains only germs of what subsequently matured into a relatively complete model," in the opening sentence of the
i932 essay Schmitt indivisibly  linked state and  politics. Reflecting on
the connection between the two, he recently commented:

The decisive question ... concerns  the  relationship  of  ...  state  and politics. A doctrine which began to take shape in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, a cioctrine inaugurated by Machiavelli, Jean Bodin, and Thomas Hobbes, endowed  the  state  with  an  important  monopoly: the European state became the sole subject of poiitics. Both state and politics were linked  just as indivisibly  as  polis and  politics in  Aristotle."

Concretely speaking, only states, and not just any domestic  or international association,  are  the  bearers  of  politics.  Hence  only states   may   conduct   with  each   other   relations   which   in   an ultimate
'  “A nmerkungen  zu  Carl  Schmitt,  Der  Begriff  des  Politischen,” Archiv
fiir Sozialwissenschaft und Social politi p, Vol. 67, No. 6, QP 73° 749  The English translation appeared in 196s in Leo Strauss’s S pinoza’s Critique of Reli'gion, tr. E. M. Sinclair (New York: Schocken Books), pp. 33i—35 i. T he discrepancies   between   my  translation  of  Schmitt  and  the  words  and  phrases
in Strauss's comments are in most instances stylistic. However, when Sinclair translated the German word Feind with “foe,” it appears that Strauss was  not aware of the conceptual distinction inherent in  the  words  “enemy”  and  “foe.” See helow, pp. Q—i i.
l ° See in particular Carl Schmitt’s Der Nom os der Erde im V ol)ert-echt dev Jus Publicum Europacum, 2nd ed. (Berlin: Dunckcr & Humblot, igym) .
i '  Carl  Schmitt,  Lr   catcgorie  del  ’politico,’  ed.  Gianfranco  Miglio and
Pierangelo Schiera (Bologna: Societa editrice il Mulino, •97°) p  .  23—°4 Although   the  German  version  of   this  preface   has  not  been   printed, Schmitt
gave me a copy of  the  ‹3erman  typescript,  from  which  this  English  version was prepared.
Introduction	1
sense are binding on their respective members. Though such relations revolve fundamentally around  questions  pertaining  to  politics,  this  by no means implies that other categories—economic, religious, cultural—do not also come into play.  Yet,  according  to  Schmitt  in the essay translated here, even ostensibly nonpolitical categories have the potential of becoming political. Once a nonpolitical category acuminates in politics, only the state is then in the position  to decide  on its interests anal undertake  appropriate  actions.  It  thus  follows that in concrete circumstances it is the prerogative of the  state  to define the content and course of politics.
Precisely because of  the  uniqueness  of  events, Schmitt  found it impossible  to  provide an  exhaustive or even  a  general  definition  of politics, one that would always  hold  true.'"  By  combining  his belief in the uniqueness of events  with  his  belief  that  man  is basically dangerous, Schmitt advanced  a  simple criterion  of  politics in this essay which so far has proven to be constant, namely, the distinction between friend and enemy.
Although  Schmitt  is  not  one  of  those  in  Germany  who con-
sider war to be a social ideal, something to be cherished, or  some- thing normal, it is, nevertheless, an ever present possibility." But the decision as to whether or not to go to war is  a  purely  political  decision and hence, in Schmitt’s construction,  something  only  the state can  decide.'* More  precisely,  as  a  state  cannot  exist  without a
l ° On Schmitt’s refusal to define politics, see the discussion by Julien Freund in his preface to the French translation of Schmitt’s essay. M Notion de palitique and Theorie dv partisan  (Paris:  Calmann-Lévy, i97°).	•" °7- '• Of the numeruus legends that surround Schmitt’s ideas, Walter Laqueur in his otherwise interesting discussion of Weimar Germany echoes several, including the assertion that Schmitt’s philosophy contained a “nihilist element”  because  it  “justified  war.”  Weimar:  A  Cultural  History  •9• 8—' 9JJ
(New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, •974) • -
l • Because sovereign states constantly confront each other in the political arena with the obvious implication of the ever present possibility of war, the late Leo Strauss in his comments on Schmitt’s essay, correctly observed that a connection exists between Schmitt and Thomas Hobbes. Whether one speaks
8	The Concept of the Political
sovereign authority, it is this authority which in the final analysis decides whether such an extreme  situation  is  at  hand."  Schmitt  thus links state, politics, and sovereignty.
This linking of state, politics, and sovereignty makes it clear
that  Schmitt’s  major  concern  is  with   the  modern   sovereign   state  as it began  to  emerge  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  From the general tone of the essay it is also clear that he personally iden- tified himself with this epoch and laments  that  the  curtain  was descending. It may well  be  asked  why  he should  object  to  the  closing of this period—especially in view of its violence. Although one can extract  the  answer  from  his  Ig3z  essay,  he  provided  it  himself  in some of his subsequent writings.
With exceptions, the epoch of the European sovereign state may be characterized as a period in which order  prevailed  within sovereign states and also in the relations between sovereign states. The Peace of  Augsburg  (i  j$$),  the  religious  compromise  of  Eliza- beth I (I$yq—i §63), and the Edict of Nantes (i5 q8) were significant

of the possibility of war or  the conflict  itself, one  difference  between  Schmitt and  Hobbes  is that, whereas for  the latter  it  “is  the state  of  war  of  individuals
—for Schmitt it is the state of war  of  groups,  and  especially  of  nations.” Though it is true that  states  in  Schmitt’s  construction  are  constantly  con- fronted by this  possibility,  and  from  this  view  might  be  said  to  exist  in  a state of nature, a qualitative difference does exist between  Hobbes’s  and  Schmitt’s state of nature [see Helmut  Rumpf,  Carl  Sch milt  und  Thomas Hobbes:  ldeellc  Bezieh ungen  und  apluelle  Bedeutung   mit  einer  Abbaiidlun g
tuber die  Friihschrifien  Carl  Schmints  (Berlin:  Duncker  8t  Humblot,  i97z) , pp. 28—86] . Precisely because  certain  explicit  conventions  governed  relations of  sovereign  states  in  time  of   war,  thereby  overcoming  the  foe  concept  (see
pp. 9—i i below), we are not justified in ascribing  to  Schmitt  a  sort  of Hobbesian state of nature.  At  the  critical  point  in  Hobbes’s  state  of  nature man may truly find himself in actual  combat, and  in  such  a  situation,  accord- ing to Hobbes, “nothing can be  Unjust.  The  notions  of  Right  and  Wrong, Justice and Injustice have  there  no  place....  Force  and  Fraud,  are  in  warre the two Cardinall virtues” (Lr«io/âna, Chap. i 3) .
'° Sec Carl Schmitt, PolltlSchR Theotogie: Vier Kapitel our Leâre rot
dcr Souveriinitat (Munich: Dunckcr ñ Humblot, i922, 1934) P '
Introduction	9
steps in the movement  toward  religious  toleration—the recognition on the part of new'1y emerging sovereign rulers in distinct territorial states ” that Christians, regardless of specific doctrinal  differences, were entitled to be treated as Christians  and  not as beings possessed by the devil to whom no quarter should be given. Once it was ac- cepted in principle that  Christians  are  equal  by  virtue of  belonging to the same religion, developments at home had definite  repercus- sions  insofar  as  relations  among  sovereign   states   were concerned.
Hence, despite doctrinal differences, Catholic and Protestant rulers were prepared to coexist in a larger community.  An  implica- tion of this development was that agreements could be concluded by sovereign states in time of peace with a reasonable expectation that these would be adhered to. Moreover, a secularized notion of politics enabled rules and regulations to emerge  which  applied  in  time  of war as well. And this mitigated the devastation that had character- ized past con fiicts,l ’
Among other things, the emerging Jun publicu m Eiiropaeti m clearly distinguished a state of peace from that of war, and clear-cut distinctions were also drawn between combatants  and  noncombat- ants, between combat and noncombat areas, and the cessation of hostilities was usually followed by a peace treaty. Furthermore, prisoners of war were entitled to be  treated  humanely,  and  the concept of neutrality was also sanctioned."
These  developments  contributed   to  changing   the  concept of
the  public  adversary, something Schmitt  did  not see  very  clearly  in
'• Despite nominally reasserting the traditional allegiance  owed  by  princes to the emperor, empire, and diet, the  treaty  of  Westphalia  (i6d8) stipulated  that  princes  in  their  respective  territorial  domains  were  sovereign “in matters both ecclesiastical and political” (Article 6q).  Article  65  consider- ably reinforced the previous one by ascribing  to  the  princes  their  right  of making or interpreting laws and declaring wars. ”
'' See, for example, Lynn Montross, War Th rough the Ages, 3rd ed.
(New York: Harper & Brothers, i 96o). PP 33 *339. 3 5. 39°. 394. 4°°-
'" See Schmitt, DCr loftf O^. PP 97—I OO, 112 *43 i ñlSO SChfflitt’s Ex
Captivitate Solut (Koln: Grcven Verlag, •95°) or s6—58.
'°	The   Conccpt  of  the Political
I93z." What we in fact  witness  is  the  transformation  of  the  foe concept in favor of the public enemy notion, i.e., the  subjection  of warfare to prescribed rules and  regulations;  hence  feelings  of  per-  sonal   hatred—so   rampant    when   ideology    dominates  politics—sub-
sided.’° Schmitt alluded to this in 1932 when he said in the essay translated here that the enemy no longer had to be “hated personally” and that an “enemy exists only when, at  least  potentially, one fight- ing collectivity of people confronts a similar collectivity.” The secu- larization of politics th us facilitated the growth of the /us publics m Europaeum,  and  this  was  accompanied  by  a  new  mode  of warfar•
in which the adversary was considered a “clean” enemy. I n i 963 Schmitt   observed   that   the  secularization  of   politics  constituted  a
definite mark of “progress in the sense of humanity.” "
Despite critical attacks on the sovereign state and  the  /ns publics m Europaeum that accompanied its development (e.g., the French revolution and the Napoleonic wars, and, in the domain of political thought, the infusion of militant ideology into politics  by Marx  and  Engels),  the  state  withstood  these  until  the  early   part of the twentieth century. But the rapid succession of momentous events—World War I, Versailles, the Communist victory  in  Mos- cow, and  the  Nazi  victory  in  Berlin  about  one year  after  the publi-
cation  of the  i 932 t e xt of Schmitt’s essay—halted  the  broad course
of development of the epoch of the European sovereign state and also soon showed that the traditional  European  sovereign  state  was no  longer  a   politically   viable  entity  in  a  rapidly  changing world.
'" See Sc hmitt’s foreword to the i 963 edition of Der Begri[f dev Politi- schen (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot), pp. • —•9
2° The conceptual distinction inherent in the  words  “enemy”  and  “foe,” and some of the  implications  of  this  distinction  are  treated  by  George Schwab in   “Enemy   oder   Foe:   Der   Konflikt   der   modernen   Politik,”   tr.   J. Zeumer,
ECirrhosis, lI, 66•;—68z.  See  also George Schwab,  The  Challe nge, pp. ss—ss i
Ion  X.  Contiades,   “ 'EXfiP OZ’  und   ‘ H  O  AEMI O Z’  in  der modernen
politischen Theorie und der griechischen Antike,” Gricchische He manistische Gesellschaft, Zweite Reihe (Athens, i96g) , pp. 5 If.
°' See Schmitt’s foreword to the iQ63 edition of Der BegriQ, p. i i.
Introduction	I I
Moreover, as this state rested on and functioned under a secular notion of politics, the infusion of militant ideology into politics underminecl the state’s very Foundation. By virtue of its contamina- tion with militant ideology, the new politics possessed a sort of “surplus val ue.”” Thus the ideologically committed totalitarian one-party states readily dismissed the principle on which the J«i publicum Europaeum was predicated, namely, the genuine accep- tance by sovereign states of the principle pacta sunt servandu. The rules of the game governing relations of sovereign states were, therefore, no longer sacrosanct but were incorporated  into the arse- nal of weapons of one-party  states  and  utilized  as  tactical  devices in gaining specific ends. And, finally, with the victory of ideologies considered to be a true and absolute one, the  adversary  was  no longer considered a “clean”  enemy,  but  a  despised  foe  to  whom no quarter should be given.
I II
Though Schmitt clearly saw in iq32 that the curtain was descending on an epoch, he undoubtedly would have welcomed the arrest and even the reversal of this process. It may perhaps be argued that, in view of  Germany’s  central  geographic  location  in  Europe, its resources, level of industrialization, and overall potential, a politically healthy Germany could have aided in halting this process,  at least temporarily. Yet, despite  Germany’s  assets, she  was  unable to reassert herself in the arena of world politics, not because  of policies pursued  by  her  former  adversaries,  but  primarily because of   domestic  economic  and  political  circumstances.  Since  she  was
unable to put her house in order, Schmitt i R '93a continued rather despairingly   tc  point  to  what   he  thought   to  be  sensible  solutions to
halt the disintegration of the Weimar state.

2° In a related context, I have discussed  this question  in  “Appeasement  and Detentc: Some Reflections,” Detente in Historical Perspecti've, câ. George Schwab and Henry Friedlandcr (New York: Cyrco Press, •975) •‹
12	The Concept of the Political
Thus, in “The Concept of the Political” and in many  of  his other writings, Schmitt focused attention on the immediate cen- trifugal forces tearing the Weimar state apart and on some of the intellectual underpinnings of these forces, including pluralism. As is well known, the theory of  pluralism  maintains  that  an individual  is  a member of many rather than just one human association, and no association, including the state, is necessarily the decisive and sover- eign one. In the competition among associations for the loyalty of individuals, the  individual  is  left  to  decide  for  himself the  extent to which he may desire to become involved. Precisely such a doc-  trine, according to Schmitt, helps to undermine the state  as  the highest and most decisive entity.
Though formulated as a theory only recently, some of the concrete manifestations were already somewhat more than faintly visible in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It was of particular concern to Schmitt that certain political forces which emerged in the modern state had begun to question and even challenge the state’s monopoly on politics. The appearance and growth of such domestic forces often caused states to immerse themselves in internal political struggles, and this not only weakened the state’s posture  vis-a-vis other states, but undermined the sovereign state in general.
In other words, as long as the state’s monopoly on politics was not seriously challenged from within, its  posture,  depending  of course on the state’s overall resources, was one of strength. rhe state’s immersion in domestic political struggles and some of the conse- quences of this under lies Schmitt’s discussion. In reflecting on this added dimension Schmitt was led to draw a distinction between “politics” and  “political.”  His  decision  not  to  entitle   his  essay The Concept  of  Po/i/fci but, instead,  Ter  Concept o| ltte Polttical, is a reflection of this distinction.
Whereas state and politics were indivisibly linked in the clas- sical European state, Schmitt recently observed that

the classical profile of the state was shattered as its monopoly on politics waned. New ...	political  protagonists asserted  themselves.	From
Introduction	'3
this (ollowed a new degree  of  reflection  for  theoretical  thought.  Now one could distinguish “politics” from “political.” The new protagonists become the core of the entire complex  of  problems  called  “political.” Here lies the beginning and thrust  of  every  attempt  to  recognize  the many new subjects of the political, which become  active  in  political reality, in the politics of the  state  or  nonstate,  and  which  bring  about new kinds of friend-enemy groupings."

Bearing in mind the circumstances under which Weimar was born, the liberal democratic nature of its  constitution,  and  the extremist political movements which were permitted to thrive there, Schmitt, as already observed, was appalled at how the state was being turned into a whipping post, and his hope was to turn the situation around.
In his endeavor to strengthen the Weimar state, Schmitt chal- lenged a basic liberal assumption then widely held either (or  philo- sophica I or tactical reasons, namely, that  every  political  party,  no matter how antirepublican, must be permitted freely to compete for parliamentary representation  and  for  governmental   power.“   This meant that the sole  requirement  of  such  parties  in  their  quest  for power was that they proceed legally.'* Because the most influential commentators  and jurists  of  the  Weimar  constitution  argued  that  it was an open document insofar  as  any  and  all  constitutional  revisions are permissible if these are brought about legally,2‘ a totalitarian
°° Schmitt, Le  cafegori!e, p. 24  The  English  version  was  prepared  from a copy of the German typescript.
2' Cognizant  of  what  had  happened  in  Weimar,  the  Basic  Law   of Bonn permits the outlawing of negative political parties (Article zi) .
°^ See Gotthard Jasper, Der Schutz  der  Re publi§:  Studicn  str  staat- lichcn Siciicrung dcr Dcmo§ratie in der Weimarer Republi) *9^2- ! 93* (Tiibingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Sicbeck] , I &3). PP. I I, Ij I§.
°• Richard   Thoma,  a  leading   jurist,  stated   that   the  Reich’s legislature
“possesses an unlimited competence, a plenitudo pote5tatis for constitutional change” in “Die Funktionen der Staatsgewalt,” Han dbuch dcs DeuiicAeti Staatsrcchts, cd. G. Anschiitz  and  R. Thoma  (Tiibingen:  J. C.  B. Mohr [Paul
Siebcck] . •932), I . •54- Gerhard Anschiitz, one of the leading commentators, noted  that  “the  constitution  does  not  stand  above  the  legislature,  but  is  at its
'4	The Conce pt of the Political
movement which succeeds in legally capturing the legislature can then proceed legally to forge a constitution and state that would reflect its militant political ideology.
Cognizant that the political left and right utilized bourgeois legality  as a weapon in  the quest for power a nd fearful of  a victory  by one of the extremist  movements  with  the  ideological  subversion of the state certain  to follow, Schmitt  saw  little  hope  in  the  ability of the Weimar state to sur v've u nless its leadership was immediately prepared  to  distinguish  friend  from  enemy  and   to  act accordingly.
Concretely speaking, he argued in i 9sz that only those parties not intent  on  subverting  the  state  be  granted   the  right   to  compete for
parliamentary and governmental power.” This obviously  meant  driving the extremists on both sides of  the  political  spectrum  from the open arena.“
Given the relative ease with which basic constitutional revi- sions could be brought about (Article y6), and the widespread adherence to legalist thinking—factors militating against the effec- tiveness o( the presidency—Schmitt, toward the end of the Weimar period, sought to strengthen drastically the president’s hands,  and hence  he  developed  the  idea  of  a  presidential  system.  Although  his presidential system had its roots in the Weimar constitution, Schmitt’s  conception   went  beyond   this  document  and   was, there-
disposal” and that therefore there were no limits on the extent to which the constitution could be amended, including its abrogation (G. Anschutz, Die Verfassun g  dev   Deutschen   Reichs  vom   i i.   Au  u!!   ! 9*9.  14th  ed. (Berlin:
Georg  Stilke,  •933a         4  •.  4°5).  Because  of  the  fate of  the  Weimar consti-
tution, the Basic Law of Bonn recognizes sacrosanct parts (Article 79-)
°’ Carl Schmitt, Le galiial und L.e grtim itat (Munich: Duncker & Hum- blot, I 93•: Berlin, 19 ) . PP- 3° 4°
"   Heinrich  Muth  is  correct  in  concluding  that  someone  who atlvnnced
such  a  thought  with  great   precision   could   under   no  circumstances   have   been iR I 9s 2  a  member  of  the  Nazi  party  nor  a  follower  nor  one  who  shared  its  ideas  (“Carl  Schmitt  in  der  deutschen  Innenpolitik  des  Sommers   ig3z,” Historische Zeitsch nift, Beihe ft [ r 9y• I P 97) ThiS Conclusion is par ticularly significant   when   one   considers   the  erroneous   insistence   by   some   that Schmitt
paved the way for the Fiih rerstaat.
Introduction	I S
fore, no  longer  in  accord  with  the  constitution’s  spirit  and  letter. In other words, he was willing to sacr.fice  a  part  of  the  constitution in order to save and  strengthen  the  existing  state.  By  advocating such an extreme position, a position certainly unacceptable to the legalists, Schmitt clearly implied, among other things, that he would accept political parties and the Weimar parliament only on the condition that they be subordinate to and united with the president in the search for solutions.
As I have noted  elsewhere,  Schmitt’s  presidential  system centered on  the  popularly  elected   president.   As  commander-in-chief of the armed forces, with the potent Article q8 of the Weimar con- stitution at his disposal and aided in his exercise of power by the bureaucracy and Reichswehr, the president, in Sch mitt’s view, could certainly have arrested the political  assaults on  the state.°’ Yet  today it  is  widely charged  that  the  presidential  system  which   came  about in  the  last  years  of Weimar  had  in  fact  paved  the  way  for  Hitler. But this misses Schmitt’s point.
The system which  finally  emerged  was an  emasculated  form of what he had urged. Hence, despite Schmitt’s pleas for the  neces-  sity of distinguishing friend from enemy, Hindenburg consistently labored under the impact of legalist doctrines and did not, therefore, forcefully move to arrest  and  eliminate  the  political  challenges facing ¥Veimar. Quite the contrary. Not only did  he  continue  to permit negatively inclined parties to operate and compete for power, but he also loathed ruling by decree.’0 It appears  that  he  was  under the confused impression that rule by  decree  might  contradict  the  oath to defend the constitution which he took upon assuming the presidency (Article 42).
°° Schwab, T’/ie Challcn ge, PP 9
°° See Hans Otto Meissner, Harry Wilde, Die Machlcrgreifun g:  Ein Bericht iiber die Tcchni§ del Nationalsozialistisclicn Staatsstreichs (Stuttgart:
J.  G.  Cotta’sche  Buchhandel, '95 )	'9.
°' According to Theodor Eschenburg, it had never occurred to Hinden- burg to undertake extreme  measures  to  save  the  constitution.  “Die  Rolle der Personlichkcit in der Krise der Weimarer Verfassung: H indenburg,
i6	The   Conce pt  o|  the  Political
This impression is decisively reinf‹arced by the letter Prelate Ludwig Kaas, head of the Center party, sent Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher   on   January  •*     9.3s 3'   A  copy   was   also  forwarded to
Hindenburg."   The   gist   of   the    letter   was   that,   since Chancellor
Schleicher possessed no parliamentary  backing,  he  should  be  dis-  missed and his place immediately assumed by Hitler, who not only controlled  the  largest  party  in  the  Reichstag  but   also  promised   to find a working majority by calling for new elections. I n other  words, Kaas’s letter clearly  implied  that  H itler’s  appointment  and  new elections  would  assure  a  return  to  regular  constitutional  procedures, and  Kaas  insisted  that  it  was  absolutely  incumbent  upon  Schleicher and Hindenburg not to follow the unconstitutional doctrines  of  Carl Schmitt  and  his  followers,"‘  namely,  among  other  things,  the  infu- sion of the friend-enem y criterion int‹›  domestic  political  struggles. Kaas’s letter explains Hi ndenburg’s volte Jace vis-a-vis Hitler,'  and Hitler’s appoint ment  confirmed  Schm itt’s  forebodings  for  the  Wei- mar state.
Bruning, Groener, Schleic her,” Viertel jahrsb e fte frir Zeitgeschicbte, Heft i (January, •96i ), p. 6.
°° This letter was rnacie public on January •9. '93s—one day before
Hitler’s  appointment.  Reprinted  in   falit but li   dcs   affcntlichen   Recb ts   der be gencart, z i (•933/3 q) , i q i—i qi.
°* Die Proto Rolle der Reich stagsfra)fi!o n und dci Fra)tion suorstands der deutschen Zentrum spartei, i 9z6 —i 933, t•d. Rudolf Morsey (Mainz: Matthias-
€iriinewald-Verlag, i 969), p. 6o9.
” fab rbuch, p. i q2. See also Schmitt’s note on this crucial episode
in    his   Verfassun gsrechtliche    An fsaize   aus   den  Wah rem	9• #—• 95# (Ber lin :
Duncker  & Humblot,  i95	•973) PP 34W35°
” Although Anclreas Dorpa len does  not  mention  this  letter,  it  is  evi- dent  from  his  account  of  I-finden Marg  and  the  Wei!mar   Republic (Princeton:
Princeton   University   Press,   i964)  t hat  the  President’s   ro/fe   face  was  quite
sudden (p P 431—4s• ) and that he finall y became convinced that H itter’s appointment   “was   the  only  constitutional solution  .	.” ( - 433)




TRAN SL A TOR S NOTE


As a rule Sch mitt’s st yle does nr›t suffer from the tlsual {Prob- lems one encounters in what is genera11 y k now n as “professorial German.” L’evertheless,  it  has  at  times  prt›ved  difhcult  to  translate his though ts with cla rity and precision. Wherever }ao.ssib1e, therefore, the translator has divided lo ng parag ra{ he and se nte rices anal even shortened some of the latter, without inn Jna iri rig the icleas Schmitt conveys. Furthermore, a number of  citations  pertaining  mainly  to specific legal  q uestions  which  have  no  relevance  to  the  English reader were om itted. But  a  m inim um  of  explanatory  notes  (marked by  asterisks)  has  been  added  whenever  the   translator   considered these important in helping the reader put the  cJuestion  discussed  in proper perspective.
















I}



THE CONCEPT
OF THE POLITICAL

In me mory oJ  m y  friend,  August  Schaetz  of  Munich,  who fcll on H ugust z8, *9!7. • the assault on Moncelul



I

The concept of the  state  presupposes  the  concept  of  the political.
According to modern linguistic usage, the state is the political status of an organized people in an enclosed territorial unit. This is nothing more than a  general  paraphrase,  not  a  definition  of  the state. Since we are concerned here with the nature  of  the  political, such a definition is  unwarranted. It may  be  left open  what  the state  is in its essence—a machine or an organism, a person or an  institu- tion, a society or a community, an enterprise or  a  beehive,  or  per- haps even a basic procedural order. These definitions and images anticipate too much mea ning, interpretation, illustration, and con- struction, and therefore cannot constitute any appropriate point of departure for a simple and elementary statement.
In its literal sense and in its historical appearance the state is a specific entity of a people.• Vis-a-vis the many conceivable kinds of
Schmitt has in mind the modern national  sovereign  state  and  not  the political entities of the medieval  or  ancient  periods.  For  Schmitt's  identifica- tion with the epoch of  the  moder n  state  see George  Schwab,  Tb e  C hallengc o] the Exception.’ An  Introduction  to  the  political  Ideas  of  P.arl  Schmitt  between 9° and zq 6 zd ed. (New York: Greenwood Press, i989), pp. z2, 5q; also,
'9
°°	The Conce pt o| the Political
entities, it is in the decisive  case the  ultimate  authority.  More  need not be said at this moment. All characteristics of this image of  entity and  people  receive  their  meaning  from  the  further  distinctive  trait of the  political  and  become  incomprehensible  when  the  nature  of the political is misunderstood.
One seldom fi nds a clear  definition of  the  political. The  word is most f requently used negatively, in contrast to various other ideas,  for example in such antitheses as politics and economy, politics and morality, politics and  law ;  and  within  law  there  is  again  politics and civil law,' and so forth. By means of such negative, often also polemical confrontations, it is usually possible, depending upon the context and concrete situation, to  characterize  something  with  clar- ity. But this is still not a specific definition. In one way or another “political” is generally juxtaposed to  “state”  or  at  least  is  brought into relation with it.2 The  state  thus  appears  as something  political, the political as something pertaining to the state—obviously an un- satisfactory circle.
George  Schwab,  “Enemy  oder  Foe:   Der   Konflikt   der   modernen   Politik,” tr. J. Zeumer, E pirrhosi's: F'estgabe fur Carl Sch mite, ed. H. Barion, E.-W.
Bockenforde, E. Forsthoff,  W.  Weber  (Berlin :  Duncker  &  Hunablot,  1968) , Il, hb5—666.
' The antithesis  of  law  and  politics  is easily  confused  by  the  antithesis of  civil  and  public  law.  According  to  J.  K.  Bluntschli  in  All gemeines Staats-
recht, Cth  ed.  (Munich:  J. G. Cotta,  i 868), I, zi9: “PFopcrty  is a  civil  law  and
not  a   political   concept.”   The   political   significance   of   this  antithesis came
particularly to the fore in i925 a Old i9z6, during the debates regarding the expropriation of the fortunes of the princes who had  formerly  ruled  in  Ger- many. The following sentence from the speech by deputy Dietrich (Reichstag
session, December  z, i9z5, BericAfe,  47i 7)  is Cited as an example: “We are of
the  opinion   that  the  issues  here  do  not  at  all  pertain   to  civil  law  questions
but are purely political ones. ”
° Also in those definitions of the political which utilize the concept  of power as the decisive factor, this power appears mostly as state power, for example, in Max Weber’s “Politik  als  Beruf,”  Geiam mclic  politischc  Schrif- ten.  3•d  ed.,  ed.  Johannes   Winckelmann    (Tiibingen:   J.  C.   B.   Mohr  [Paul
Siebeck] ,  197  )   PP   5o5,  •;O6:   “aspiring   to  participate  in  or  of influencing
the distribution  of  power,  be it  between  states,  be  it  internally  between groups
The    Conce pt  o|  the  Political	!
Many such descriptions of the political appear in professional juridic literature. Insofar as these are  not  politically  polemical,  they are of practical and tech nical interest and  are  to  be  understood  as legal or administrative decisions in particular cases. These  then  re- ceive their meaning by the presupposition of a  stable  state  within whose framework they operate. Thus there exists, for example, a jurisprudence and literature pertaining to the concept of the  political cltib or the political meeting in the law of associations. Furthermore, French administrative law practice has attempted  to  construct  a concept of the political motive (m obile politique) with whose aid political acts of government (actes de gon ver nem ent) could be dis- tinguished from nonpolitical administrative acts and thereby removed trom the control of administrative courts."
Such  accommodating  definitions serve  the  needs of  legal prac-
of  people  which  the  state  encompasses,”  or  “leadership  or  the  influencing  o( a political  association,  hence  today, of  a  state”;  or  his  “Parliament  und Regie-
rung im neugeord neten  De utsch land,”  ibid., P  347:  “The  essence  of  politics is  ...      combat,  the  winning  of  allies and  of  voluntary  followers.”  H. Triepel,
Staatsrecht und Politi) (Berlin : W. de G ruyter & Co., 9°7) PP- •*—• 7. says: “Until recent decades  politics  was  still  plainly  associated  with  the  study  of  the  state....  In  this  vein  Weitz  characterizes  poI ities  as  the  learned discus-
sion of the state with respect to the  historical  development  of  states  on  the whole as well as of their current conditions and needs.” Triepel then  justly criticizes the ostensibly nonpolitical, purely juristic approach of the  Cerber- Laband school and the attempt at  its  continuation  in  the  postwar  period (Kelsen) . Nevertheless, Triepel had not yet  recognized  the  pure  political meaning of this pretence of an apolitical purity, because he subscribes to the equation politics = state.  As  will still  be seen  below,  designating  the adversary as political and oneself as nonpolitical (i.e., scientific,  just,  objective,  neutral, etc.)  is in actuality  a  typical  and  unusually  intensive  way  of  pursuing politics.
...      For   the  criterion   of   the   political   furnished   here (friend-enemy
orientation), I draw upon the particularly  interesting  de£nition  of  the  spe- cifically political acte dc gonuernement which Dufour . . (Traité de droi°t administrati f ap plique, V, i 28) has advanced:  “Defining  an  act  of  govern- ment is the purpose to which  the  author  addresses  himself.  Such  an  act  a inns at defending society itself  or  as  embodied  in  the  government  against  its internal or external enemies, overt or covert, present or future. ”
22	The Conce pt o f the Political
tice. Basically, they provide a practical way of delimiting legal competences of cases within a state in its legal procedures. They  do not in the least aim at a general definition of the political. Such definitions of the political suffice, therefore, for as long as  the state and the public institutions can be assumed as something self-evident and concrete. Also, the general definitions of the political which contain nothing more than additional references to the state are understandable and to  that  extent  also  intellectually j ustifiable  for as long as the state is truly a clear and unequivr›cal eminent entity confronting nonpolitical groups and affairs—in other words, for  as long as the state possesses the monopoly on politics.  That  was  the case where the state had either (as in the eighteenth century) not recognized society as an antithetical force or, at least (as  in  Ger- many in the  nineteenth  century  and  into  the  twentieth),  stood above society as a stable and distinct force.
The equation state = politics becomes  erroneous  and  decep- tive at exactly the moment when state and society  penetrate  each other. What had been up to  that  point  a9airs  of  state  become thereby social matters, and, vice versa, what had been purely social matters become affairs of state—as must necessarily occur in a dem- ocratically organized unit. Heretofore ostensibly neutral domains— religion, culture, education, the economy—then  cease  to  be  neutral in the sense that they do not perta in to state and to politics. As a polemical concept against such neutralizations and depoliticaliza-  tions of important domains appears the total state, which potentially embraces every domain. This results in the identity of state  and society. In such a state, therefore, everything is at least potentially political, and in referring to the state  it  is  no longer  possible  to assert for it a specifically political characteristic.
[Schmitt’s Note]
The development can be  traced  from  the  absolute  state  of the eighteenth century via the neutral (noninter ventionist) state
The   Concept   of the   Political	*3
of the nineteenth to the total  state  c›f  the  twentieth.‘  Democracy must do away with all the  typical  distinctions  and  depoliticaliza- tions characteristic ref the liberal ninetee nth century, also with those corresponding tC› the nineteeiath-century antitheses and divisions pertaining to the state-society ( = political against social) contrast, namely the followi ng, .i mong n u merous rather thorough ly  polemical and thereby agai n political antitheses:

religious as antithesis of political cultural	as antithesis of political economic as  antithesis  of  political legal	as antithesis of political scientific as antithesis of political

The more profound thinkers of the nineteenth cent ury sor›n recognized this. I n Jacob Hurck hardt’s Wrlt geschichtliche Betrach - fondrr (of  the  period  around  i Sao)  the   following   sentences   are found on “democracy,  i.e.,  a  doctrine  nourished  by  a  thousand  springs, and varying greatly  with  the  social  status  of  its  adherents. Only in  one  respect   was  it  consistent,   namely,   in   the   insatiability of its demand for state control of the individual. Thus it blurs the boundaries between state and society and looks  to  the  state  for  the things that society  will  most  likely  refuse  to do,  while  maintaining a permanent condition of argument and change and ultimately vindicating the righ t  to  work  and  subsistence  for  certain  castes.” Burck hardt  also  correctly  noted  the  inner  contradiction  of  democ-

its  existing  form  in  any  crisis—and  after  all,  what  men  want more

’ See Carl Schmitt,  Der  Hitler  der  VerJassun g  (Tubingen:  J.  C.  B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck] , i93i; Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, i 9*9) PP- 7 *79
°4	The Concept of the Political
state’s form thus becomes increasingly questionable and its radius
Thethan anything else is to participate in the exercise of its power.

of {Power ever broader.”“
state is quali-German political science originally ma inta ined (under the impact of Hegel’s philosophy of the state) that the
tatively distinct from society and higher than it.  A  state  standing above society could  be  called  tmiversal  but  not  total,  as  that  term is understood nowadays, namely, as the polemical negatir›n of the neutral state, whose economy and law were in themselves  nonpolit- ical. Nevertheless, after  i 8q8,  the  qualitative  distinction  between state and society to which Lorenz von Stein and Rudolf G neist still subscribed lost its previous clarity. Notwithstanding certain limita- tions, reservations, and comprom ises, the development of Germa n political science, whose fundamental lines are  shown  in  my  treatise on Preuss,’ follows the historical development  toward  the  demo- cratic identity of state and society.
An interesting national-liberal intermediary stage is recogniz- able in the works of Albert Haenel. “To generali ze  the  concept  of state altogether with the concept of h uman society” is, according to him, a “downright mistake.” He sees in the state  an  entity  joining other organizatir ns of society but of a “special  kind  which  rises  above these and is all embracing.” Although its general purpose is universal, though only in the special task of delimiting  and  organ- izing socially effective forces, i.e., in the specific function of the law, Haenel considers wrong the belief that the state has, at least poten- tially, the power of making all the social goals of humanity  its goals too. Even though the state is for him universal, it is by  no  mea ns  total.’ The decisive step is found in Gier ke’s  theory  of  association (the first volume of his Dan deutsche Genossenschafisrecht appeared
^ Kriiner’s edition, pp. i 33. 35. •97
* Hugo Preuss: Sein Staatsbe griQ and Seine Stcllung i'n der deutsche n Staatsleh re (Tiibingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck] , I93o) .
Studies sum Deoricñen Starter echte (Leipzig: Verlag von H. Haessel,
I ss8) ,  II,  219:    e  • * °*  e  J  Start tsrech t   (Leipzig:   Duncker   &   HumblOt,   '   9°) . I, i io.
The   Conce pt  of the   Political	°5
in i 568) ,  because  it  conceives  of  the  state  as  one  association  equal to other associations. Of course, in addition to the associational  ele- ments, sovereign ones too belonged to the state and were sometimes stressed more o nd sometimes  less.  But, since  it  pertained  to  a  theory of association and not to a theory of sovereignty of the state, the democratic consequences were undeniable. I n Germany,  they  were drawn  by  Hugo  Preuss  a nd   K.  Wol zendorff,   whereas  in   England  it led to pluralist theories (see below, Section q) .
While awa it ing further enlightenment, it seems to me that Rudolf Smend's theory  of  the  integration  of  the  state  corresponds to a political situation in which society  is  no longer  integrated  into an  existing  state (as  the  German  people  in  the  monarchical  state of the nineteenth century) but should itself integrate into  the state. That this situation  necessitates the total state is expressed most clearly
in Smend’s remark about a sentence from H. Tresc her’s i9t S disser- tation   on   Montesquieu   and   Hegel.'   There   it   is   sa id   of   Hegel’s
doctrine of the division of powers that it signifies “the most vigorous penetration of all societal spheres by the state for  the  general  pur- pose of win ning for the entirety of the state all vital energies of the people.” To which Smend adds that this is “precisely the integration theory” of his book. In actuality it is the total state which no longer knows anything absolutely nonpolitical, the state which  must  do away with the depoliticalizations of the  nineteenth  century  and which in particular puts an end to the principle that the apolitical economy is independent of the state and  that  the state is apart  from the economy.



A definition of the political can be obtained only by discover- ing and defining the specifically political categories.  In  contrast  to the various  relatively  independent  endeavors  of  human  thought and
' Rudolf Smend, VcrJassung und Vcrfassungsrecht (Munich: Duncker
& H umbl •. '9° ). P- 97. ROt0 2.
z6	The Concept of the Political
action, particularly the moral, aesthetic, and economic,  the  political has its own criteria  which  express  themselves  in  a  characteristic way. The political must therefore rest on its own  ultimate  distinc- tions, to which all action with a specifically political mea ning ca n be traced. Let us assume that in the realm of morality the final distinc- tions are between good and evil, in aesthetics beautiful and ugly, in economics profitable a nd unprofitable. The question then is whether there is also a special distinction which can serve as a sim pie crite-  rion of the political a nd of what it consists. The nature of such a political  distinction  is  surely  different  from  that  of   those  others.  It is independent of them and as such cats speak clearly for itself.
The specific political distinction to which political actions and motives can be reduced is that between f rietid and enemy.* This provides a defi nition in the sense of a criterion and not as  an exhaustive definition or one  indicative  of  substantial  content.{ Insofar as it is not derived from other  c riteria,  the  antithesis  of  friend and enemy corresponds  to  the  relatively  independent  criteria of other antitheses: good  and  evil  in  the  moral  sphere,  beautiful  and ugly in the aesthetic sphere, and so on. In any event it is inde- pendent, not in the sense of  a  distinct  new  domain,  but  in  that  it can neither be based on any one a ntithesis or any  combination  of other antitheses, nor can it be traced to  these.  If  the  antithesis  of good and evil is  not  simply  identical  with  that  of  beautiful  and ugly, profitable and unprofitable, and cannot be  directly  reduced  to the others, then the antithesis  of  friend  and  enemy  must  even  less be confused with or mistaken  for  the  others.  The  distinction  of friend and enemy denotes the utmost  degree of  intensity  of  a  union or separation, of an association or dissociation. It can exist theo-
Since Schmitt identified himself with the epoch of the  national  sov- ereign state with its joJ po6ficurit Europaeiim, he used the term Feind in  the enemy and not the foe sense.
I Of the numerous discussions of Schmitt’s friend-enemy criterion, particular attention is called  to  Hans  Morgenthau’s  La  Noti’on  du “politi que” et  la  theorie   dev  di[ferends  internationaux   (Paris:  Sirey,   i 933)    PP    35 37.
44    4  The critique  contained  therein  and  Schmitt’s  influence  on  him  is often
implied in Morgenthau’s subsequent writings.
The   Concept  of  the   Political	°7
retically  and  practically,  without  having  simultaneously  to   clraw  upon all those moral, aesthetic, economic, or other distinctions. The political enemy need  not  be  morally  evil  or  aesthetically  ugly ;  he need not appear as :in economic competitor, and it may even be advantageous to engage with him in business transactions. But he is, nevertheless,  the  other,  the  stranger ;  and  it  is  sufficient  for  his nature that he is, in a specially intense way, existentially something different and a lie n, so  that  in  the  extreme  case  confi icts  with  him are  {Possible.  The.se  can  neither  be  decided  by  a  previously  deter- m tried J;eneral norm nor by the judgment of a clisinterested a ted therefore neutra1 third part y.
Only the actual {Participants ca n correctly recr›gnize,  under- stand,  and  j udye  the  concrete  situation  and  settle  the  extreme   case of confl ict. Each |aartici{aa nt is in a position to j udpe whether the adversary intends to negate his oppr›nent’s way of  life  and  therefr›re must be re{ ulsed r›r fought in order to preserve one’s own form of existence. kmr›tionally the enemy is easily treated as  being  evil  a nd ugly, beca use every distinction, most of  all  the  political,  as  the strongest and most  intense  of  the  distinctions  and  categorizations, draws upon other distinctions for support. This does not a lter the autonomy  of  such  distinctions.  ConsecJuently,  the  reverse  is   also true: the morally evil,  aesthetically  ugly  or  economically  damaging need not necessarily be the enemy ; the morally good, aesthetically beautiful,  and  economically  profitable  need  not  necessarily   become the  friend  in  the  specifically  political   sense  of  the   word.  Thereby the inherently objective  nature  and  autonomy  of  the  political  be- comes evident by virtue of its being able to treat, distinguish, and comprehend the friend-enemy antithesis independently  of  other antitheses.

3
The friend and enemy concepts are to be understood in their concrete and existential sense, not as metaphors or symbols, not
28	The    Concept   oJ   the  Political
mixed and weakened by economic, moral, and  other  conceptions, least of all in a private-individualistic sense as a psychological expression   of   private  emotions   and   tendencies.  They   are neither













e con-
cern here is neither with abstractions nr›r with normative ideals, but with inherent reality and the real possibility  of  such  a  distinction. One may or may not share these hopes and pedagogic ideals.



The  enemy  is  not  merely   any  competitor   or   just   any   partner  of  a  conflict  in  general.  He  is  also  not  the   private   adversary   whom one  hates.  An  enemy  exists  only  when,  at  least   potentially,   one  fighting  collectivity  of  people  confronts  a  similar   collectivity.   The enemy is solely the public enemy,  because  everything  that  has  a relationship  to  such  a  collectivity  of  men,  particularly  to   a   whole nation,  becomes  public  by   virtue  of   such   a   relationship.   The   enemy iS OJf*i, nOt in im icu s in the broader sense ; JtokS[ttoq, not t2ilpñS.’
In his Repuhlic (Bk. V, Ch. XVI. 47°) Plato strongly emphasizes the contrast between the public enemy (nolSttto9) and the private one (t;(fipfiq), but in connection with the other antithesis of war (ftdlepo9) and insurrec-
The   Conce pt  of the  Political	*9
As German and other languages do not  distinguish  between  the  private and political enemy, many  misconceptions  and  falsifications are | ossible. The often c|ur›ted “Love your  e ncmies”  (Matt.  y:qq; Luke 6:2J) reads “diligite inimicos vestros,” dyonfiit  sold  fzilpoé9 Lqu›v, a nd not dillglt e hostes vestros. No me ntion is made of the political enemy. Never in the thousa nd-year struggle between Cih ris- tians and Moslems did it occ ur to a  Ch r istia n  to  surrender  rather than defend Europe out of love toward the Saracens or Turks.  The enemy in the politica1 sense need  not  be  hated  [her sonally,  arid  in the private sphere only does it make sense to love one’s enemy, i.e., one’s ad versary. The l3ible c} uotatir›n touches the political a ntithesis even less tha n it intends to dissolve, for example,  the  antithesis  of good and evil or beautiful a nd ugly. I t certainly d‹›es not mean that one should love and support the enemies of one’s own people.
The political is the most intense and extreme antagonism, and every concrete antagonism becomes that much more political the closer it approaches the most extreme point, that of the friend-enemy grouping.   In   its  entirety   the  state  as  an   organized   political entity
tion, upheaval, rebellion, civil war (pitiptq) .• Real war for Plato is a  war between Hellenes and Barbarians only  (those  w ho are  “by  nature enemies”), w hereas con fiicts among Hellenes are for him discords (pTd£ft tq).  The thought expressed here is that a people can not wage  war  against itself  and  a civ il war is onl y a self-laceration and it does not signify that perhaps  a new state or even a new people is being created. Cited  mostly  for  the  âoi/ii con- cept is Pomponius in the Digest •fo, i6,  i i 8. The  most  clear-cut  defi nition with additional supporting material  is in  Forcellini’s Lexicon  totius latinimali›
(i q6$ ed.), II, 684 : “A public enemy (hostis) is one  z ith  whom  we  are  at  war publicly.... In this respect he differs from  a  private  enemy.  He  is  a person  with  whom  we  have  private quarrels. They may also be  distinguished
as follows: a private enemy  is a  person  who  hates  us, whereas  a  public  enemy  is a person who fights against us.”
Stasis also means the exact opposite,  i.e.,  peace  and  order.  The  dia- lectic in hercnt in the term is pointed out by Carl Schmitt in Politische Theologle II: Die Legendc von der Erledigun g  jeder  Polltische n  Theologie (Berlin : Duncker ñ Humblot, i9yo ), pp. i i y—i i 8.
3°	The   Concept  of   the  Political
decides  for  itself  the  friend-enemy   distinction.  Furthermore,   next to the primary political decisions and under the protection of the decision taken, numerous secondary concepts of the  political  ema- nate. As to the equation  of  politics and  state discussed  under Section i,  it nas  the effect, for  example, of  contrasting  a  political  attitude of a state with party politics so that one can speak of a state’s domestic religious, educational, communal, social policy, and so on. Not- withstanding, the state encompasses and relativizes all these  an- titheses. However an antithesis and  antagonism  remain  here  within the state’s domain which have relevance for the concept of the political."  Finally  even  more  banal  forms  of   politics  appear, forms

This becomes evident in daily speech  and  can  be exemplified by two obvious phenomena. First, all political concepts, images, and terms have a polemical meaning. They are focused on a  specific conflict and are bound to a concrete situation ; the result (which manifests itself in war  or  revolution)  is  a  friend-enemy  grouping, and they turn into empty and ghostlike abstractions when  this situa- tion disappears. Words such as state, republic," society, class, as well
A social policy existed ever since a politically noteworthy class put forth its social demands; welfare care, which in early times  was administered to the poor and distressed, had not been considered a sociopolitical problem and was also not called such. Likewise a church policy existed only where a church constituted a politically significant counterforce.
Machiavelli, for example, cal1s all nonmonarchical states republics, and his definition is still accepted today. Richard  Thoma  defines democracy as a nonprivileged state; hence all nondemocracies are classifiecl as privileged states.
The   Conce pt  of  the  Political	3I
os sovereignty, constitutional state, absolutism, dictatorship, economic planning, neutral  or  total  state,  and  so  on,  are  incomprehensible  if one does not know  exactly  who  is  to  be  affected,  combated,  refuted, or  negated   by  such  a  term.”   Abovc  all   the  polemical   character de-
z ° N timerous forms an tI degrees of intensity  of  the  polemical  character are also here possible. But the essentially polern ical rl a ture of the politically charged terms and concepts rem a in nevertheless recognizable. Terminolrigical questions become thereby highly political. A word or expression can sim ul- taneously be reflex, signal, password,  n net  weapon  in  a  hostile  confrontation. For example, Karl Ren ner, a socialist  of  the  Second  I n ter national,  in  a  very sig nificant  sc holar I y pu blication, Die Techth nsti trite dcs Privatrcchts (Tubin- Men: J. C. H.  Mott r  [ Paul Siebeck] ,  i gz9), P.  9 j, call s  rent  w hich  the tenant
pays  the  I an elf ord  “tribute.”  Most  German   professors  of   jurisprutlence,   j udges,
and la wycrs, woulcl consider such a clesignation  an  inal rn issible  politicaliza- tion of civil law rel at ions hips and would reject  this  on  the  grounds  that  it  would  rJisturb  the  purely  juristic,  purely   legal,  purely  scientific   discussion. For t hens the question h as been decided in a legal positivist man ner, and the therein  residing  political  clesign  of  the  state  is  th us  recognizecl.   On   the other hand, man y socialists of the Second International  put  m uch  val ue  in calling the  pa yrnents  which  armed  France  imposes  upon  disarmed  Cerm any not  “tribute,”  but  “reparations.”  “Reparation”  appears  to  be   more   juristic, more  legal,  more  peaceful,  less  polemical,  and  more  apolitical  than  “tribute.” In  scrutinizing   this  more  closely,  however,  it  may  be  seen   that   “reparation” is  more  highly  charged  and  therefore  also  political  because  this  term  is utilized politically to condemn juristically and even  morally  the  vanquished enemy. The imposed payments have  the  effect  of  disqualif y ing  and  subjugat- ing  hint  not  onl y  legally  but  also  morally.  The   question   in  German y  today is whether one should say “tribute” or “reparation.” This  has  turned  into  an internal dispute.  In  previous  centuries  a  controversy  existed  between  the German  kaiser  (and  king  of  Hungary)  and  the  Turkish  sultan  on  the  ques- tion of whether the payments made  by  the  kaiser  to  the  sultan  were  in  the nature of a “pension” or “tribute.” The debtor stressed  that  he  did  not  pay “tribute”  but  “pension,”  whereas   the  creditor   considered   it   to  be   “tribute.” In the relations between  Christians  and  Turks  the  words  were  still  used  in  those days more openly  and  more  objectively,  and  the  juristic  concepts  per- haps had not yet become to the same extent as today political instruments of coercion. Nevertheless,  Bodin,  who  mentions  this  controversy  (LeJ  Six  Livres dc  la  Rc publique,  Paris,  i •i8o,  p.  28q),  adds  that  in  most  instances “pension”
32	The Conce pt o| the Political
terrines the use of the word political regardless of whether the adversary is designated as nonpolitical (in the sense of harmless), or vice versa if one wants to disqualify or denounce him as political in order to portray oneself as nonpolitical (in the sense of purely scien- tific, purely moral, p urely juristic, purely aesthetic, purely economic, or on the basis of similar purities) and thereby superior.
Secondly, in usual domestic polemics the word political  is today often used interchangeably with party politics. The inevitable lack of objectivity in political decisions, which is only the reflex to suppress the politically inherent friend-enemy antithesis, manifests itself in the regrettable forms and aspects of the scramble for office and the politics of patronage. The  demand for  depoliticalization which arises in this context means only the rejection of party politics, etc. The equation politics = party politics is possible whenever antagonisms among domestic political parties succeed in weakening the all-embracing political unit, the state. The intensification of internal antagonisms has the effect of weakening  the  common identity vis-a-vis another state. If domestic conflicts among political parties have become the sole political difference, the most extreme degree of internal political tension is thereby reached; i.e., the domestic, not the foreign friend-and-enemy  groupings  are  decisive for armed conflict. The ever present possibility of  conflict  must always be kept in mind. If one wants to speak of politics in  the context of the primacy of internal politics, then  this conflict  no longer refers to war between organized nations but to civil war.
For to the enemy concept belongs  the ever  present  possibility of combat. All peripherals must be left aside from this term, in- cluding military details and the development of weapons technology. War is armed combat between organized  political entities ; civil  war  is armed combat within an organized unit. A self-laceration en- dangers the sur vival of the latter. The essence of a weapon is that
is paid not to protect oneself from other enemies, but primarily from the protector himself and to ransom oneself from an invasion (pour se rachcter de f’inunJioa) .
The    Concept  of the  Political	-‘l3
it is a means of physically killing human beings. Just as the term enemy, the word combat, too, is to be understood  in  its  origin al existential  sense.  It  does  not  mean  competition,  nor  does  it   mean pure intellectual controversy nor symbolic wrest lings iii which, after all, every human being is somehow always involved, for  it is a fact
that  the entire  life of  a  human  bei ng is  a struggle  a net  every  human
being sy mbolically a combatant. The friend, cnemy, and combat concepts  receive  their  real  meaning  precisely   because   they refer  to the  real  possibility  of  physical  killing.  War   follows  from  enmity. War is the existential negation of the enemy.* It is the most ext reme consequence of enmity. It does not have to be common, normal, something ideal, or desirable. But it must  nevertheless remain a real possibility  for  as long as the  concept  ref  the  enena y remains valid. It is by no means as though the political signifies nothi rig but devastating war and every political  deed  a  military  action,  by  n‹a means as though every nation would be uninterruptedly f aced with the  friend-enemy  alternative  vis-a-vis  every  other   nation. And,  after all, could not the politically reasonable course reside in avoiding war!  The  definition  of  the  political   suggested   here neither   favors war nor militarism, neither imperialism nor pacifism. Nor is it an attempt to idealize the victorious  war or the successful revolution as a  “social  ideal,”  since  neither  war  nor  revolution is  something social or something ideal.' 3 The military battle itself is not the
* Schmitt clearly alludes here to the foe concept in politics.
"  Rudolf  Stamml er’s  thesis,  w hich  i.s  rooted   in   neo-Kantian   thought, that the “social ideal” is the  “community  of  free  willing  individuals”  is  con- tradicted by Erich Kaufmann  in  Das  Wesen  des  Vol)errechts  und  die  clauiiilu rebus  sic  stantibus  (Tubingen :  J.  C.  B.  Mohr  [Paul  Siebeck) ,   91 I) ,   .   iq6,  who maintains that “not the  community  of  free  willing  individuals,  but  the victorious war  is  the  social  ideal:  the  victorious  war  as  the  last  means  toward  that  lofty  goal”  (the  participation  and  self-assertion  of  the  state   in   worlci history).  This  sentence  incorporates  the  typical  neo-Kantian  liberal  notion  of “social ideal.” But wars, including victorious wars, are something completely incommensurable and incompatible with this  conception.  This  idea  is  then joined to the notion of the victorious war, which has its habitat in the
34	The Concept of the Political
“continuation of politics by other means” as the famous term of Clausewitz is generally incorrectly cited.“ War has its own strategic, tactical, and other rules and points of view, but they  all  presuppose that the political decision has already been made as to who the enemy is. In war the adversaries most often confront each other openly ; normally they are identifiable by a uniform, and the distinction  of friend and enemy is therefore no  longer  a  political  problem  which the fighting soldier has  to solve. A  british  diplomat  correctly  stated in this context that the politician is better schooled for  the battle than the soldier, because the politician fights his whole life whereas the soldier does so  in  exceptional  circumstances  only.  War  is  neither the aim nor the purpose nor even the very content of  politics.  But  as an ever present possibility it is the leading presupposition which determines in a characteristic way human ac:ion and thin king and thereby creates a specifically political behavior.
The  criterion  of   the  friend-and-enemy  distinction  in  no way
implies that  one  particular  nation  must  forever  be  the  friend  or enemy  of   another  specific  nation  or  that  a  state  of   neutrality  is  not
Hegelian-Rankian philosophy of history, in which social ideals do not exist. The antithesis which appear s at first glance to be striking thus breaks  into  two disparate parts, and the rhetorical force of a thunderous contrast can neither veil the structural incoherence nor heal the intellectual breach.
'• Carl  von Clausewitz  ( fottt  Kriege, zn.d ed.  [ Berlin:  Ferd. Dumm-
lers Verlagsñuchandlung, *53] VOl. I II, Part II I, p. i zo) says: “War is nothing  but a continuation  of  political  intercourse  with  a  mixture  of other
means.” War is for him a “mere instrument of politics.” This  cannot  be denied, but its meaning for the understanding of the essence of politics is thereby still not exhe usted. To be precise, war, for Clausewitz, is not merely one of many instruments, but the ii/?itna ratio of the friend-and-enemy group- ing. War has its own grammar (i.e., special military-technical laws),  but politics remains its brain. It does not have its own logic. This can only be tlerived from the friend-and-enemy concept, and the sentence on page i z i reveals this core of politics: “If war belongs to politics, it will thereby assume its character. The more grandiose and powerful it becomes, so will also the war, and this may be carried to the point at which war reaches its absolute form. ”
The Concept oJ the Political	3
possible or could not be Politically reasonable. As with every political concept, the neutrality concept too is subject to the ultimate pre- supposition of a real possibility of a friend-and-e nemy grouping. Should only neutrality {Prevail in the world, then not only  war  but also neutrality would come to an end. The politics of avoiding war terminates, as does all politics, whenever the possibility of fighting disappears. What alwa ys matters is the possibilitY  of  the extreme case taking place, the real wir, and the decision  whether  this situa- tion has or has not arrived.
That the extreme case appears to be an exception does not negate its decisive character but confirms it all the more. To  the extent that wars tod:iy have decreased in  n umber  and  frequency, they have proportionately increased in ferocity. War is still today the most extreme possibility. One can say  that  the exceptional case has an especially decisive meaning which exposes the core of the matter. For only in real comb:it  is  revealed  the  most extreme consequence of the political grouping of friend and enemy. From this most ex- treme possibility human  life derives its specifically political tension. A world in which the possibility of war is utterly eliminated,
a completely pacified globe, would be a world without the distinction of friend and enemy a nd hence a world without politics. It is con- ceivable that such a world might contain many very interesting antitheses and contrasts, competitions and intrigues  o(  every  kind, but there would not be a  meaningful  antithesis  whereby  men could be required to sacrifice life, authorized to shed blood, and kill other human beings. For the definition of the political, it is here even irrelevant whether such a world without politics is desirable as an  ideal situation. The phenomenon of the political can be understood only in the context of the ever present possibility of the friend-and- enemy grouping, regardless of the aspects which this possibility implies for morality, aesthetics, and economics.
War as the most extreme political means discloses the possi- bility which underlies  every  political  idea,  namely,  the  distinction of friend and enemy. This makes sense only as long as this distinc-
$6	The Conce pt of the Political
tion in mankind is actually present  or at least  potentially  possible.  On the other hand, it would be senseless to wage war for purely religious, purely moral, purely juristic, or purely economic motives. The friend-and-enemy grouping and therefore also war ca nnot be derived from these specific antitheses of human  endeavor.  A  war need be neither something  religious nor  something  morally  good nor something lucrative. War today is in all likelihood none of these. This obvious point is mostly confused by the fact that  religious, moral, a nd other antitheses can intensify to political ones and can bring about the decisive friend-or-enemy constellation.  If,  in  fact,  this occurs, then the relevant antithesis is no longer purely religious, moral, or economic, but political. The  sole  remaining  question  then is always whether such a friend-and-enemy grouping is really  at  hand, regardless of which human motives are sufhciently strong to have brought it about.
Nothing can  escape  this  logical  conclusion of  the  political. If pacifist hostility toward war were so strong as  to drive  pacifists  into a war against non pacifists, in a war against war,  that  would prove that pacifism truly possesses political energy because it is suPiciently strong to group men according to friend  and  enemy.  If,  in fact, the will to abolish war is so strong that  it  no  longer  shuns war, then it has become a political motive, i.e., it afhrms, even if only as an extreme possibility, war and even the reason for war. Presently this appears to be a peculiar way of justifying wars. The war is then considered to  constitute  the  absolute  last  war  of   humanity.  Such a war is necessarily unusually intense and inhuman because, by transcending the limits of the political framework, it simultaneously degrades the enemy into moral and other categories and is forced to make of him a monster that must not only be defeated  but  also  utterly destroyed. In other words, he is an  enemy  who  no  longer must be compelled to retreat into  his  borders  only.•  The  feasibility of such war is particularly illustrative of the fact that war as a real
* Also here Schmitt clearly alludes to the enemy-foe distinction.
The Conce pt of the Political	37
possibility is still present today, and this fact is crucial for the friend- and-enemy antithesis and for the recognition of politics.

4
Every religious, moral, economic, ethical, or other antithesis transforms into a political one if  it  is  sufhciently  strong  to  group human beings effectively according to friend and enemy. The political doe5 not reside in the battlc itself, whick possesses its ow'n technical, psychological, and militar y laws, but  i n  the  mode  of  behavior  which is determined by this possibility, by clearly evaluating the concrete situation and  thereby  being  able  to  distinguish  correctly  the  real friend and the real enemy. A religious community which wages wars against members of other religious commute ities or engages  in  other wars is already more than a  religious  community ;  it  is  a  political entity. It is a political entity when it possesses,  even  if  only  nega-  tively, the capacity of promoting that decisive step, when it is in the position of forbidding its members to participate in wars,  i.e.,  of decisively denying the enemy  equality  of  a  certain  adversary.  The same holds true for an association of individuals based on economic interests  as,  for  example,  an  industrial  concern  or  a  labor  union. Also a class in the Mar xian sense ceases to be something purely  economic and becomes a political factor when it reaches this decisive point, for example, when Marxists approach  the  class  struggle  seri- ously and treat the class adversary as a  real  enemy  and  fights  him  either in the form of a war of state  against  state  or  in  a  civil  war  within a state. The real battle is then of necessity no longer fought according  to  economic  laws  but  has—next  to  the  fighting   methods in the narrowest technical sense—its political necessities and orienta- tions, coalitions and compromises, and so on. Should the proletariat succeed in seizing political power within  a  state,  a  proletarian  state  will thus have been created. This state  is  by  no  means  less  of  a political power than a national state, a theocratic, mercantile, or
38	The Concept o| the Political
soldier state, a civil service state, or some other type  of political entity. Were it possible to group all mankind in the proletarian and bourgeois antithesis, as friend and enemy in proletarian and capitalist states, and if, in the process, all other friend-and-enemy  groupings were to disappear, the total reality of the political would then be revealed, insofar  as  concepts,  which  at  first  glance  had  appeared  to be purely economic, turn into political ones. If the political  power of a class or of some other group within  a  state  is  sufficiently  strong to hinder the waging of  wars against other states but incapable of assuming or lacking the will to assume the state’s power and  thereby decide on the friend-and-enemy distinction and, if necessary, make war, then the political entity is destroyed.
The political can derive its energy from  tne  most  varied human endeavors, from the religious, economic, moral, and other antitheses. It does not describe its own substance, but only the intensity of an association or dissociation of human beings whose motives can be religious, national (in the ethnic or cultural sense) , economic, or of another kind and can effect at different times dif- ferent coalitions and separations. The real friend-enemy grouping is existentially so strong and  decisive  that  the  nonpolitical  antithesis, at precisely the moment at which it becomes political, pushes  aside and subordinates its hitherto purely religious,  purely  economic, purely cultural criteria and motives to the  conditions  and  conclu- sions of the political  situation  at  hand. In  any  event, that  grouping  is always political which orients itself toward this most extreme possibility. This grouping is therefore always the decisive human grouping, the political entity. If such an entity exists at all,  it  is  always the decisive entity, and it is sovereign in the sense that the decision about the critical situation, even if it is the exception, must always necessarily reside there.
A valid meaning is here  attached to  the  word  sovereignty, just as to the term entity. Both do not at all imply that a  political entity must necessarily determine every aspect of a person’s  life or that a centralized system should destroy every other organization or
The   Conce pt  of  the   Political	?9
corporation.* It  may  be  that  econom ie  considerations  can  be  stronger than  a nything  desired  by   a   government   which   is  ostensibly   indiffer ent toward  economics.  Likewise,  religious  convictions  can  easily determine the politics of  an  alleged ly  ne ut ral  state.  Wh ‹it  al ways matters is only the {aossibi lity of con fiict. If, in  fact,  the  eco nomic, cultural, r›r religious con n terf or ces are so strong that  they  are  in  a position  to  decide  u)ac› n  the  extreme  }›ossibility  from  their   vie w- point,  then  these  forces  have  in  actuality   become   the   new  substa rice  of the political entity.  It  would  be  a n  indicatiran  that  these  counter-  forces  had  not  reached  the  decisive  point  in   the   political   if   they turned  out  to  be  not  sufficiently   po we rf ul  to  prevent  a  war  contrar y to  their  interests  r›r  princi[ les.  Should  the  counterforces  be  strong enough  to  hinder  a  war  desired  by   the   state   that   was   contrary   to their interests or principles but not sufficiently capable  themselves  of deciding  about  war,  then  a  unified  political  entity   would   no  longer exist.  However  one  may  look  at  it,  in  the  orientation  toward   the possible extreme case of  an  actual  battle  against  a  real  enemy,  the political en tity is essential, and it is the decisive entity for the f riend- or-enemy  grouping;  and  in  this  (and  not  in  any  kind  of   absolutist sense),   it   is   sovereign.   Otherwise   the   political   entity   is   nonexistent.
When the political significance of domestic economic associ- ations had been recognized, in particu1;ir the growth of labor unions, the laws of the state appeared quite power less against their economic weapon, the strike. Consequently, some have somewhat hastily pro- claimed the death and the end of the state. As far as I can tell this emerged as a doctrine of the French sy ndicalists after  i po6  and i9oy.“  Duguit  is  in   this  context  the  best  known  political  theorist.
Schmitt has consistently maintained this idea and thus has never entertained the thoug h t of a totalitarian state. See Schwab, The C.hallen gc,
pp.  i #6—• 4
'* “This  enormous  thing  ...     the  death  of   this  fantastic, prodigious
being which held such a colossal place in history: the state is dead.” E. Berth, whose ideas stem from Georges Sorel, in L.e Mouvemeni  sonialiste,  October I 9°7.   P    3' 4.   Léon   Duguit   cites   this   in   his   lectures   Le   Mr   It   Joe/o/,    /e droit
4°	The  Concept  of  the Political
Ever since i 9 he has tried to refute  the conception  of  sovereignty and the conception  of  the personality  of  the state with some accurate
arguments against an uncritical metaphysics of the state and  per- sonifications of  the  state,  which  are,  after  all,  only  remna nts  from the world of princely  absolutism  but  in  essence  miss  the  actual political meaning of the concept of sovereignty.  Similar ly,  this  also holds true for  G.  D.  H.  Cole’s  and  Harold  Lo sk i’s  so-called  theory of  pluralism,  which  appeared  somew hat  later  in  the  Anglo-Saxon ivor Id.“  Their  pluralism * consists  in  denying  the  sc›vereignty  of  the

i ridir/'‹fiie/  ct  In  trati sforni ation  dc  l’Etat,  1st  ed.  (Paris:  Felix  Alcan,   i9o8). He   considered    it   sufhcien t   to   say   the t   the   sovereign   state   conce iv'ed   as a
person  is   rleacl   or   at   the   point   of   d ying   (p.   i 5o:   “L’L tat   personnel   et  son vera in	est  n4ort  ou  sur  ie  point  tie  mour ir”) .  Such  sentences   are   not fo u nil in Duguit’s  L’Ftiit  (Paris:  Thor in  ct  Fil s,  i go i ),  alt hougla  the  c ritique  of  the  sovereignty  concept  is  :ilreacly  the  same.  Inter csting  all   itional   exam- ples   of    this   sy nH ica list    diagnos is   of    the    contern porary    state    appear  in
A. Esme in’s EU ni ents de droii cert stitutio n rrel (-th ed., ed. H.  Nézar d  Paris: Sirey,  i 9z i ] ,  I,  55 IL ),   and  abo v'e  all  in  the  par ticul arl y  interest ing  book by
Max iinc Leroy, Lr   Tru ti s foriiiutio ii s de lu pihssu rice  pit bliqi+e  (I°aris: V. Giard
" '•. ' 9^•›) . Wit h respect  to  its  ‹1 ia gnosis  of  the  state,  the  syndica list doctrine is also to be  cl istingtiishe‹i  from  t he  Marxist  construction.  For  the Marxists   the  state  is  not  deacl  or  at  the  point  of   cly in g.  The   state  is  ra ther a
iaaeans  for  bringing  about  classes  and  necessary  to   na ake   the   classless   and then I he  stateless  society.  But  in  the  meantime  this  state  is  still  real,  and precisely  with  the  a id  of  Marx1st  doctrine  it  has  received  new   energies   and new life in the Soviet Union.
" A survey arm  pla usible  assemble ge  of  Cole’s  theses  (form ul ated  by  him) is reprinted in the Proceeds! n5s oJ the At‘istoteli°an Societ y, XV I ( ' 9' )
3io -325.  The   cen tral   thesis  here  is  also  that  states  are  equal   to  other kinds
of  h tim an  associations.  J“he  following  works  by   Laski  are  mentioned:   Studies in th e Problem o f Sovereigrit y (i ' 7) ^!! i it y in the Modern  S/••• ( ' 91  ), Foundations  o  Soverei gnlv ('9 21) , A G ram mar   of   Politl!Cs   (1  25)   “Das Recht  und  der  Sta at,”  Zritsch ri/t  Jiir  o  fen tliclies   Recht,  X   ( i  3.1 ),   1   27› also,   K ung    Chuan    Hsiao,    Political    l’liiralism     (London:    K.    Paul, Trench,
* As far as the translator can gather,  the  Anglo-Saxon  theory  of  plural- ism was unknown in €ierman y until Schmitt called attention to it.
The   Conce pt  of  the   Political	â'
political  entity  by  stressing  time  and  again  that  the  individual  lives  in numerous different  social  entities  and  associations.  He  is  a  mem- ber of a religious institution, nation,  labor  union,  family,  sports  club, ancl many other associations. These control  him  in  differing  degrees from  case  to  case,  and  impose  on  him  a  cluster  of  obligations  in such a way that no one of these associations can tae said  to bc decisive  find sovereign. On thc  contrary,  each  one  in  a  difierent  field  may prove to be  the  strongest,  and  then  the  conflict  of  loyalties  can  only be resolved from case to case. It is  conceivable,  for  example,  that  a  labor union should decide to order its members nri longer  to  attend church, but in spite of it they continue to do  sr›,  anal  that  simultane- ously a demand by the ch urch that members leave the  labor  union remains likewise unheeded.
Particular ly strik ing in this exam}ale is t)ie co-ordination of religious associ:itions a nd labor un ions, which cr›uld result  in  an  alliance  because  of   their  com mon  antipathy   toward   the  state.  This is typical of the [Pluralism which appears  in  the  A nglo-saxon  coun- tries. Its main theoretical p‹›int of departure was, next to €J ier ke’s association theory, J. Neville Figgis’ book on churches in the modern state." The historical context to which Laski always retur us and
Trubner a Co., Ltd., ' 92J) . For a critique of this pluralism  see  W.  Y.  Elliott, “The  Pragmatic  Politics  of  Mr.  H.  J. Laski,”  The  Am e rican  Political Sciencc
Review, XVII1 (192d), 2§ i—zJ 5 ; The Pragmatic  Scroll  in  Politics  (New  York: The Macmillan Co., i928) ,  and  Car1  Schmitt, “Staatsethik und pluralistischer Staat,”  Kent-Sta dren,  XXXV  (1930) ,  2S- 4z. On the   pl uralist   splintering   of the   contemporary    German   state   an cJ    the   development   of   parliament    into a
showcase  of   a   pl uralist  system  see  Carl  Sch m itt,  Der   H inter  der  Verfassun g
(Tiibingen :  J.  C.  B.  Moh r   [Pa ul  Siebeck]      93 i ;  Berlin;  Duncker  8t Humblot,
*969)› PP' 73
"   Figgis,  Churches  in  the   Modern   State   (London:   Longmans, Green
and Co., i g i 3) noted on p. 249 that  Maitland,  whose  legal  historical  re- searches  likewise  influenced  the  pluralists,  considered  G ier ke’s  Dan deutsclie
GenossenschaJtsrech I “to be the greatest book he had ever read” and remarked  that the medieval controversy between ch urch and  empire,  i.e.,  between  pope and emperor, or more precisely between the  spiritual  order  and  the  temporal ones,  was  not  a  controversy  of  two  societies  but  a  civil  war  within  the same
4^	The Conce pt of the Political
which obviously made a great impression on him  is  the  sim ultane- ous and equally unsuccessful attacks of Bismarck  against  the  Cath- olic Ch urch a nd the socialists. I n the  Kiiltur jam p|  against  the Roman Church it was seen  that  even  a  state  of  the  unimpaired  streng th of Bismarck’s Reich was not absolutely sovereign and
}aowerful. This state was equ all)' unsuccessf ul in  its  battle  against the socialist wor k ink class. Woulcl this state have been sufhcie ntly strong in the economic  domain  to  remove  from  the  labor  unions their power to strike ?
3’his critique is largely j ustified. The j uridic form ulas of the omnipotencc of the  state  are,  in  fact,  only  super ficia1  secula rizations oJ theological form ulas of the om nipote rice of €iod.* A lso, the nine- teenth-ce ntury  die rman   doctrine  of   the  {aersonalit y  of   the   state  is
social entity. hut toclny  two  societies,  trio  popiili,  face  one  another.  This  in my opinion is correct. In the period prior  to  t he schism  t he  relation  of  pope  and emperor could still be unclerstood according to the formula that the pope possessed the auctoritas and the emperor the potestas. Accor dingl y a division existed within the same entity, und Catholic  cioctrine  since  the  t well th  cen- tury has main to ined that ch urch and  state are two  societates, and  indeed both are societates perfectae (each one sovereign and a utarclaic in its own domain) . Naturally on the  side  of  the  Ch urch  the  Catholics  recognized  their  church only as  societal  pcrfecta,  whereas  on  the  side  of  the  state  today  a  pl urality of societates perfectae appear,  whose  perfection,  considering  the  great  num- ber, becomes very problematical  A n  extraordinarily  clear  summary  of  Cath- olic  doctrine  is  contained   in  Pa ul  Simon’s   “Staat   uncl   K irche,” Deutsches
Vol)stum  (August  i93i ),  PP  576-596.  The  co-ordination  of  churches  and labor unions which is typical of the A nglo-Sa xon pl uralist notion  is naturall y unt hin kable in Catholic  theory, and  it is  just as  inconceivable  for  the Catholic
Church to permit itself to be treated on an equal level with an international labor union. In reality the Church serves Lask i, as  Elliott  aptly  remarked, only as a “stalking horse” for the iabor unions. A clear  and  fundamental debate on the two theories and their m utual relations is unfortunately missing so far on the side of the Catholics as well as on the part of the pluralists.
* As  early  a  •92z  Schmitt  asserted  that  “all  significant   concepts   of the  theory  of  the  modern  state are secularized  theological  concepts.” Pofiiiirâe
Tbeologie.  Vier  Ka pitel  zur  Lehre  von  der  Sonverânitat  (Munich:  Duncker fi
Humblot, ig22, I 9J‹), P 49-
The     Concept   of the   Political	43
inn Portant  here  beca use  it  was  in  part  a  polemical  antithesis  to  the
}›ersonality of the  absolute  prince,  and  in  part  to  a  state  considered as a higher third (vis-a-vis all other social groups) with the  aim  of evading the  dilemma  of  monarchical   or   popular   sovereignty.   But the question remains unanswered: which social entity (if  I  am  per- mitted to use here  the  imprecise  liberal  concept  of  “social”) decides the extreme case a nd determines the  decisive  friend-and-enemy grouping ? Neither a  church nor  a  labor  un ion  nor  an  alliance  of  both could have forbidden or  prevented  a  war  which  the  German Reich   might   have   wanted   to   wage   under   Bismarck.   He   could not declare war  against  the  pope,  but  only  because  the  pope  no longer  possessed the  /ai  belli;  and  also  the  socialist   labor   u nions did not want to. appear in the role of a  partie  belligérante.  I n  any event, no organized opposition then imaginable could have possibly deprived the  German  Cover nment  of   making  the  relevant   decision in the extreme case; such an opposition  would  have  risked  being  treated as an enemy and would thus have been affected by all the consequences of  this  concept.  Furthermore,   neither   the   Church   nor a labor union was prepared to engage in a civil war." These con- siderations are sufhcient to establish a reasonable concept  of  sover- eignty and entity.  The  political  entity  is  by  its  very  nature  the decisive  entity,  regardless   of   the   sources   from   which   it  derives its
" Because Laski also refers to the controversy of the English Catholics with Gladstone, the following sentences are cited here from Cardinal John Henry Newman’s letter to the Duke of for folk [regarding Gladstone’s The Vatican Dccrces in Their Bearing on Ciuil Allegiance (thug)]. “Suppose England were to send her Ironclads to support Italy against the Pope and his allies, English Catholics would be very indignant, they would take part with the Pope before the war began, they would use all constitutional means to hinder it; but who believes that, when they were  once  in  the  war,  their action would be anything else  than  prayers and  exertions  for a  termination of it? What reason  is there for saying  that  they  would  commit  themselves to any step of a treasonable  nature  ...  ?”  A Letter  Addressed  to His Grace he Du)e of Norfol § (New York: The Catholic Publication Society, i875)
p. 6q.
44	The Concept of the Political
last psychic motives. It exists or does not exist. If it exists, it is the supreme, that is, in the decisive case, the authoritative entity.
That the state is an entity and in fact the decisive entity rests upon its political character.  A  pluralist  theory  is  either  the  theory of state which arrives at the unity of state by a federalism of social associations or a theory of  the  dissolution  or  rebuttal  of  the state. If, in fact, it challenges the entity and places the political association on an equal level with the others, for example, religious or economic associations, it must, above all, answer the question as to the specific content of the political. Although in his numerous  books  Laski speaks of state, politics, sovereignty, and government, one does not find in these a specific definition of the political. The state simply transforms itself into an association which competes with other associations; it becomes a society among some other societies which exist within or outside the state. That  is the pluralism  of  this theory of state. Its entire ingenuity is directed  against earlier  exaggerations of the state, against its majesty and  its personality,  against  its claim to possess the monopoly of the highest unity, while  it  remains unclear what, according to this pluralist theory of state, the political entity should be. At times it appears in its  old  liberal  form,  as  a mere servant of the essentially economically determined society, at times pluralistically as a distinct type of society, that is, as one asso- ciation among other associations, at times as the product of a federalism of social associations or an umbrella association of a conglomeration of associations. Above all, it  has  to  be  explained why human beings should have to form  a governmental  association in addition to the religious, cultural, economic, and other associa- tions, and what would be its specific political meaning.  No  clear chain of thought is discernible here. What appears finally is an all-embracing, monistically global, and by no means pluralist con- cept, namely Cole’s “society” and Laski’s “humanity.”
The pluralist theory of state is in itself  pluralistic,  that  is, it  has no center but draws its thoughts from rather different intel-  lectual circles (religion, economics, liberalism, socialism, etc.). It
The Concept oJ the Political	45
ignores the central concept of every theory of state, the political, and does not even mention the possibility that the pluralism of associa- tions could lead to a federally constructed political entity. It totally revolves in a  libera1 individualism.  The  result  is  nothing  else  than a revocable service for individuals and their free associations. One association is played off against another and all c}uestions and coi- flicts are decided by individuals. In reality there exists no political society or association but only one political entity—one political community. The ever present possibility of a friend-and-enemy gr‹ruping sufhces to forge a clecisive entit y which transcends  the mere societal-associational groupings. The political entity is some- thing specifically different, and vis-a-vis other associations, something decisive." Were this entity to  disappear,  even  if  only  potentially, then the political itsclf  would  disappear.  Only  as  long  as  the essence of the political is not comprehended or not taken into consideration is it possible to place a political association pluralisti- cally on the same level with religious, cultural, economic, or other associations and permit it to compete with  these. As we shall attempt to show below (Section 6), the concept of the political yields plural- istic consequences, but not in the sense  that,  within  one  and  the same political entity, instead of the decisive friend-and-enemy group- ing, a pluralism could take its  place  without  destroying  the  entity and the political itself.



To the state as an essentially political  entity  belongs  the  yet belli, i.e., the real possibility of deciding  in  a  concrete  situation  upon the enemy and the  ability  to  fight  him  with  the  power  emanating from the entity. As long as a politically united people is prepared
'° “We can say that on the  day  of  mobilization  the  hitherto  existing society was transformed into a community.” E. Lederer, “Zur Soziologie des Weltkriegs,”  Archiv  fiir  Sozialwissen scha ft  und   Social politi‘§ .  39   (1915) › P- 349-
46	The Concept of the Political
to fight for its  existence,  independence,  and  freedom  on  the  basis of a decision emanating from the political entity, this specifically political question has primacy over the  technical  means  by  which the battle will be waged, the nature of the army’s organization, and what the prospects are for winning the war. The development of military techniques appears to move in a direction  which  will perhaps permit only a few states to survive, i.e., those whose indus- trial potential would allow them to wage a promising war. Should smaller and weaker states be unable to maintain  their  independence by virtue of an appropriate alliance, they may then be forced, volun- tarily or by necessity, to abdicate the /oi belli. This  development would still not prove that war, state, and politics  will  altogether  cease. The numerous  changes  and  revolutions  in  human  history and development have produced new forms and dimensions of political groupings. Previously existing political structures were de- stroyed, new kinds of foreign  and  civil  wars arose, and  the number of organized political entities soon increased or diminished.
The state as the decisive political entity possesses an enormous power: the possibility of waging war and thereby  publicly disposing  of the lives of men. The jet belli contains such a disposition.  It implies a double possibility: the right to demand from its own members the readiness to die and  unhesitatingly  to  kill  enemies. The endeavor of a normal state consists above all in assuring total peace within the state and its territory. To create  tranquility,  secu- rity, and order and thereby establish the normal situation is the prerequisite for legal norms to be valid. Every norm presupposes a normal situation, and no norm can be valid in an entirely abnormal situation.
As  long  as  the  state  is  a  political  entity   this  requirement  for
internal peace compels it in critical  situations  to decide  also  upon the domestic enemy. Every state provides, therefore, some kind of formula for the declaration of an internal enemy. The no\Ettvog declaration  in  the public  law  of  the Greek  republics  and  the hostis
The Conce pt of the Political	47
declaration in Roman  public  law  are  but  two  examples.  Whether the form is shar{ er or milder, explicit or implicit, whether ostracism, expulsion, proscription, or out lawry are  provided for in special  laws or in explicit or gencr:i1 descriptions, the a inn is always the same, namely to declare an enemy.  That,  depending  on  the  attitude  of those who had  been  declared  enem res of state, is  possibly  the  sign of civil war, i.e., the dissolution of the state as an organized political entity, internally peacef u1,  territorially  enclosed,  anal  impenetrable to aliens. The civil war then decides the further fate of  this  entity. More so than for other states, this is particularly valid for a consti- tutional  state,  despite  all  the  constitutional  ties  to  which  the  state is bound. In a constitutional state, as Lorenz von Stein says, the constitution is  “the  expression  of  the  societal  order,  the  existence of society itself. As soon as it is attacked the battle  must  then  be waged outside the constitution and the law, hence decided  by  the power of weapons.” *
The  authority  to decide, in  the  form  of  a  verdict  on  life and
death, the jet ei/ae ac necis, can  also  belong to  another  non political order within the political entity, for instance,  to  the  family  or  to  the head of the household, but  not  the  right  of  a  Norris  declaration  as  long as  the  political  entity  is  an  actuality  and  possesses  the  /oi belli. If a political entity  exists  at  all,  the  right  of  vendettas  between families  or kinsfolk  would  have  to  be  suspended  at  least  tempo- rarily during a war. A human group which renounces these  conse- quences of a political entity ceases to be a political group, because it thereby renounces  the  possibility  of  deciding   whom  it  considers   to be the enemy and how he should be  treated.  By  virtue  of  this  power over the physical life of men, the political  community  transcends  all other associations or societies. Within the community, however, sub- ordinate   groupings  of   a  secondary   political   nature   could   exist with
Omitted here is a long note by Schmitt on examples of enemy decla- ration. The Lorenz von Stein citation is from his Geschichte der sostale n Besegung in Fran §reicb, I, Dcr BegriB der Gesellschaft, eâ. C›. Salomon (Munich: Drei Masken Verlag, •9°•) P 494-
4*	The    Concept  of   the Political
their  own  or   transferred   rights,  even  with  a   limited   /oi   rifae ar
nerii over members of smaller groups.
A religious community, a church,  can  exhort  a  member  to die for his belief and become a martyr, but only for  the salvation  of  his own soul, not for the religious community in its quality as an earthly power; otherwise it assumes a political dimension. Its  holy wars and crusades are actions which presuppose an enemy decision, just as do other wars. Under no circumstances  can  anyone  demand that any member of an economically  determined  society,  whose order in the economic domain is based upon rational procedures, sacrifice his life in the interest  of  rational operations. To  justify  such a demand on the basis of econ omic expediency would contradict the individualistic principles of a liberal  economic  order  and  could never be justified by the norms or ideals of an economy auton- omously conceived. The individual may voluntarily  die  for  what- ever reason he may wish. That is, like everything in an essentially individualist liberal society, a thoroughly private matter—decided upon freely.
The economically functioning society possesses sufficient means to neutralize nonviolently, in a “peaceful” fashion, those economic competitors who are inferior, unsuccessful or mere “perturbers.” Concretely speaking, this implies that this competitor will be left to starve if he does not voluntarily accommodate himself. A purely cultural or civilized system of society  will  not lack social indications to rid itself of  unwanted  perturbations  or  unwanted  additions.  But no program, no ideal, no norm, no expediency confers a right to dispose of the physical life of other human beings. To demand seriously of human beings that they  kill others  and  be  prepared  to die themselves so that trade and industry may flourish for the  survivors or that  the purchasing  power  of  grandchildren  may  grow is sinister and crazy. It is a manifest fraud to condemn war as  homicide and then demand of men that they wage war, kill and be killed, so that there will never again be war. War, the readiness of combatants to die, the physical killing of human beings who belong
The Concept of the Political	49
on the side of the enemy—all this has no normative meaning, but an existential meaning only, particularly in a  real combat  situation  with a real enemy. There exists no rational purpose, no norm  no  matter how true, no program no matter how exemplary, no social ideal no matter how beautiful, no legitimacy nor legality which could justity men in killing each other for this reason. If  such  physical  destruc- tion of human life is not motivated by an existential threat  to one’s own way of life, then it cannot be justified. Just as little can war be justified by ethical and juristic norms. If there  really  are enemies in the existential sense as meant here, then it is justified, but only politically, to repel and fight them physically.
That justice does not belong to the concept of war has been generally recognized since Grotius.20 The notions which postulate a  just war usually serve a political purpose. To demand of a politically united people that it wage war for a just cause only is either some- thing self-evident, if it means that war can be risked only against  a real enemy, or it is a hidden political aspiration  of  some  other  party to wrest from the state its yet belli and to find norms of justice whose content and application in the concrete case is not decided  upon  by the state but by another party, and thereby it determines who  the enemy is. For as long as a people exists in the political sphere, this people must, even if only in the  most  extreme  case—and  whether this point has been reached has to be decided by it—determine  by itself the distinction of friend and enemy. Therein  resides the essence of its political existence. When it no longer possesses the capacity or the will to make this distinction, it ceases to exist politically. If it permits this decision to be made by another, then it is no longer a politically free people and is absorbed into another political system. The justification of war does not  reside in its being fought for  ideals or norms of justice, but in its being fought against a real enemy. All
2° De jure belli ac pacis, Vol. i, Bk. I, Ch.  i,  @ z:  “J ust‘ice  is  not  included in the definition (i.e., of  war] .”  In  the  scholasticism  of  the  Middle Ages   war   against   heretics   was   considered   just—a   bellum   justum   (accordingly as war, not as execution, peaceful measure or sanction).
5°	The   Conce pt  of   the  Political
confusions  of  this category  of  friend  and enemy  can  be explained as
results of bleedings of some sort of abstractions or norms.
A people which exists in the sphere of the political cannot in case of need renounce the right to determine by itself the friend-and- enemy  distinction.   It  can  solemnly  declare   that  it  condemns   war  as a means of solving international disputes  and  can  renounce  it  as  a means of national policy, as was done in the so-called Kellogg Pact
Of   1928.z'   In  so  doing  it  has  neither   repudiated   war   as  an instru-
ment of international politics (and a war as an instrument of inter- national politics can be worse than a war as an instrument of  a  na- tional policy only)  nor  condemned  nor  outlawed  war  altogether. Such a declaration is subject, first of all, to specific reservations which are explicitly or implicitly self-understood as, for example, the reservation regarding the autonomous existence of the state and its self-defense,  the  reservation  regarding  existing  treaties,  the  right  o( a continuing free and  independent  existence,  and  so  on.  Second, these  reservations  are,  according  to  their  logical  structure,  no  mere
2'... ThKellogg  Pact * text of  August  zy,  i9z8, contains  most  impor- tant reservations—England’s national honor, self-defense, the League Cove- nant and Locarno, welfare and  territorial  integrity  of  territories  such  as Egypt, Palestine, and so forth; for France: self-defense, League Covenant, Locarno and neutrality treaties, above all the observance of  the Kellogg Pact; for Poland: self-defense, observance of the Kel.logg Pact, the League Cove- nant....  Thegeneral   juristic  problem  of  reservations  has  so  far  received no
systematic treatment, not even there where explicit  treatments  mention  the  sanctity of treaties and the sentence pacta sunt servan da. To fill this gap a noteworthy beginning is to be found in Carl Bilfinger, “Betrachtungen iiber politisches  Recht,”   Zeitschri ft   fiir  auslandisch•      B••!!•’•ltei   Recht   und Vol-
perrech I, I  (I 9• 9). s  —26.  With  respect  to  the  general  problem  of  a pacified
humanity, see Section 6 below. On the fact  that  the  Kellogg  Pact  does  not outlaw   war,   but   sanctions   it,   see   E.   M.   Borchard,   “The   Kellogg Treaties
Sanction War,” ibid., pp. •• 3•. and Arthur Wegner, Ein/*â rung tn die Rechtsmissenschaft (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, i93i ), pp. io9—i i i.
On the Kellogg Pact see also Carl  Schmitt,  Der  Nom os  der  Erde  itn V‘ol §errecht dev Jus Publicum Europacum (Koln: Greven Verlag, 93 ; Berlin : Duncker & Humblot, 974) PP *55. °7°
The   Concept  of  the   Political	5!
exceptions to the norm, but altogether give the norm its concrete content. They are not peripheral but essential  exceptions;  they  give the treaty its real content in dubious cases. Third, as long as  a sovereign state exists, this state decides for itself, by virtue of its independence, whether or  not  such  a  reservation  (self-defense, enemy aggression, violation of  existing  treaties  including  the  Kellogg Pact, and so on) is or is not given in  the  concrete  case. Fourth, war cannot altogether be outlawed, but only specific indi- viduals, peoples, states, classes, religions, etc., which, by being out- lawed, are declared to be the enemy. The solemn declaration of out- lawing war does not  abolish  the  friend-enemy  distinction,  but,  on the contrary, opens new  possibilities  by  giving  an  international Goi/ii declaration new content and new vigor.
Were this distinction to vanish then political  life  would  van- ish altogether. A people which exists in the political sphere cannot, despite entreating declarations to the contrary, escape  from  making this fateful distinction. If  a  part  of  the  population  declares  that  it no longer recognizes  enemies,  then, depending  on  the circumstance, it joins their side and aids them. Such a declaration does not abolish  the reality of the friend -and-enemy distinction. Quite another ques- tion concerns citizens of a state who  declare  that  they  personally have no enemies. A private person has no political enemies. Such a declaration can at most say that he would  like  to  place  himself outside the political community  to  which  he  belongs  and  continue to live as a private individual only.2' Furthermore, it would be  a mistake to believe that a nation could eliminate the distinction  of friend and enemy by declaring its friendship for the entire world
°° In this case it is a matter for the political community somehow to regulate this kind of nonpublic, politically disinterested existence (by privi- leges for aliens, internment, exterritoriality, permits of residence and conces- sions, laws for metics, or in some other way). On aspiring to a life without political risks (definition of the bourgeois) see Hegel’s assertion  below, Section y.
52	The Concept of the Political
or by voluntarily disarming itself. The  world  will  not  thereby become depoliticalized, and it will not be transplanted into a condi- tion of pure morality, pure  justice,  or  pure  economics.  If  a  people is afraid  of the  trials  and  risks  implied  by  existing  in  the  sphere of politics, then another people will appear which will assume these trials by protecting it against foreign  enemies  and  thereby taking over political rule. The protector then decides who the enemy is by virtue of the eternal relation of protection and obedience.
[Schmitt’s  Note]
On this principle rests the feudal order  and  the  relation  of  lord and vassal, leader and led, patron a nd clients. This relation is clearly and explicitly seen here. No form of order, no reasonable legitimacy or legality can exist without protection  and  obedience.  The protego er go obligo is the rogi/o ergo so m of the state. A polit- ical theory which does not systematically become aware of this sentence remains an inadequate  fragment.  Hobbes  designated  this (at the end of his English edition of i65 I, p. 3Q6) as  the  true  pur- pose of his M viathan, to instill in man once again “the  mutual relation between Protection and  Obedience” ; human  nature  as well as divine right demands its inviolable observation.
Hobbes himself had experienced this truth  in  the  terrible times of civil war, because then all legitimate and  normative  illu- sions with which men like to deceive themselves regarding political realities in periods of untroubled security vanish. If within the state there are organized parties capable of according their members more protection than the state, then  the  latter  becomes  at  best  an  annex of such parties, and the individua I citizen k mows whom he has to obey. As has been shown (under Section q above),  a  pluralistic theory of state can justify this. The fundamental correctness of the protection-obedience axiom comes to the fore even more clearly in foreign policy and interstate relations:  the  simplest  expression  of this axiom is found in the protectorate under international law, the
The   Conce pt  of  the   Political	53
fecleral statc, the confederation of states dominated by one of them, and  the  various  kinds of  treaties  offering  protection  and guarantees.
It would be ludicrous to believe that a defense less people has nothing b ut friends,  and  it  would  be  a  deranged  calculation  to su[opose  that  the  enemy  cou Id  perhaps  be  touched  by   the  absence of a resistance. No one thinks it possible that the world could,  for example, be transformed into a condition of pure morality by the renunciation   of   every   aesthetic  or  economic   productivity.   Even less
ca n a peoPle hope to bring about  a  purely moral  or  purely economic
condition of humanity by evading every political  decision.  If  a people  no longer  possesses  the energy or the will to maintain  itself in the sphere of politics, the latter will not thereby vanish from the world. Only a weak people will disappear.

6
The political entity presupposes the  real existence of  an enemy  and  therefore  coexistence   with   another   political   entity.  As   long  as a state exists, there will thus  always  be  in  the  world  more  than  j ust one state. A world state which embraces the entire globe and all of humanity can not exist. The political world is  a  pluriverse,  not  a universe.  In  this  sense  every  theory  of  state  is  pluralistic,  even though in a diflerent way from the domestic  theory  of  pluralism discussed in Section q.  The  political  entity  cannot  by  its  very  nature be  universal  in  the  sense  of  embracing  all  of  humanity  and   the entire  world.  If  the  diflerent  states,  religions,  classes,  and  other human  groupings  on  earth  should  be  so  unified  that  a   conflict among them is impossible and even inconceivable and  if  civil  war  should forever be foreclosed  in  a  realm  which  embraces  the  globe, then the distinction of friend and  enemy  would  also  cease.  What remains is neither politics nor state,  but  culture,  civilization,  eco- nomics, morality, law, art, entertainment, etc. If and when this
54	The Conce pt of the Political
condition will appear, I do  not  k now.  At  the  moment,  this  is  not the case. And it is self-deluding to believe that the termination of a modern war would lead  to  world  peace—thus  setting  forth  the idyllic goal of complete  and  final depoliticalization—simply  because a war between the great powers today may easily turn  into a  world war.
Humanity as such cannot wage  war  because  it has  no enemy, at least not on this planet. The concept of humanity excludes the concept of the enemy, because the enemy does not cease to  be  a human being—and hence there is no specific diRerentiation in that concept. That wars are waged in the name of humanity is not a contradiction of this simple truth ; q uite the contrary, it has an especially intensive political meaning. When a state  fights its  polit- ical enemy in  the  name  of  humanity,  it  is  not  a  war  for  the  sake of  humanity,  but  a  war   wherein   a  particular  state  seeks  to  usurp a  universal  concept  against  its  military  opponent.  At  the  expense of its opponent, it tries to identify itself with humanity in  the  same  way as one can misuse peace, justice, progress, and  civilization  in order to claim these as one’s own and  to  deny  the  same  to  the enemy.
The concept of humanity is an especiall y useful ideological instrument of imperialist expansion, and in its ethical-humanitarian form it is a specific vehicle of economic imperialism. Here one is reminded of a somewhat modified expression of I°roudhon’s:  who- ever invokes h umanity wants to cheat. To confiscate the word humanity, to invoke and monopolize  such  a  term  probably  has certain incalculable effects,  such  as  denying  the  enemy  the  quality of being human and declaring him  to  be  an  outlaw  of  huma nity ; and  a  war  can  thereby  be  driven  to the  most  extreme inhumanity."
"’ On  outlawing  war,  see  above, Section  S.  Pufendorf   (De  Jure naturae
et gentium, VIII, 6, As) quotes  approvingly  Bacon’s  comment  that  specific peoples  are  “proscribed   by  nature  itself,”   e.g.,  the  Indians,  because   they   eat
human flesh. And in fact the  Indians  of  North  America  were  then  extermi- nated.  As  civilization   progresses  and  morality   rises,  even  less  harmless things
The Concept oJ the Political	55
But besides this highly politica1 utilization of the nonpolitica! term humanity,  there  are  no  wars  of humanity  as  such.  H umanity   is  not a political concept, and no political entity or society and no status corresponds to it. The eighteenth-century humanitarian concept of humanity was a polemical denial  of  the  then  existing  aristocratic- feudal system and the privileges  accompanying  it.  Humanity  ac- cording to natural law and liberal-individualistic doctri ries  is  a universal, i.e., all embracing, social ideal, a system  of  relations  be- tween individuals.  This  materia lizes  only  when   the  real   possibility of war is {›recl uded a nd every f riend a nd enemy proupitiy becomes impossible. I n th is universal society  there  would  no longer  be nations in the form of political entities, no class .struggles, a nd no enemy groupings.
The League of Nations idea was clear and  precise  as  long  as such a body  could  be construed  as a  polemical  antithesis  of  a  league oi monarchs. It was in  this  context  that  the  German  word  Vol)er- bund originated in the eighteenth ceIi tur y. But  this  polemics1 mean-  ing disappeared with the political significance  of  monarchy.  A Vol)erbun d could moreover  ser ve  as  an  ideological  instr ume nt  of the imperialism of a state or a coa lition of states  against other  states. This would then con fi rm all that  has  been  said  previously  concer r- ing the  political  use  of  the  term  humanity.  For  many  people  the ideal of a  global  organization means  nothing  else  than  the  utopian idea of total depolitica lization. Demands are therefore made, almost always indiscriminately,  that  all  states   on   ea rth   become   members as soon as possible a nd that it be universal. Universality at any price would necessarily have to mean total depolitica lization and with it, particular ly, the nonexistence of states.
As a result of the i 9i9 Paris peace treaties an incongruous organization   came   into  existence—the   Geneva   establishment, which
is  called   in   German   V’of)erbun d   (in    French,  Socicte   Jes Nations,
than devouring human flesh could perhaps qualify as deserving to be out- lawed in such a manner. Maybe one day it will be enough if a people were unabte to pay its debts.
56	The   Concept   o|  the Political
and English,  the League  of  Nations)  but  should  properly  be called a society of nations. This body is an organization  which  presup- poses the existence of states, regulates some of their m utual relations, and even guarantees their political existence. It is  neither  universal nor even an international organization. If the German word for international is used correctly and honestly it must be distinguished from interstate and applied instead  to  international  movements which transcend the borders of states and ignore the territorial integrity, impenetrability, and impermeability of  existing  states  as, for example, the Third I nternational. Inn mediately exposed here are the elementary antitheses of international and interstate, of a de- politicalized univer sat society and interstate guarantees of the if alet quo of existing frontiers. It is hard to com[nrehend how a scholarly treatment of the League of Nations could sk irt this and even lend support to this confusion. The Geneva League of Nations does not eliminate the possibility  of  wars,  just  as it does  not  abolish  states. It introduces new possibilities for wars, permits wars to take place, sanctions coalition wars, and by legitimizing  and  sanctioning  cer- tain wars it sweeps away  many  obstacles  to  war. As  it  has existed so far, it is under specific circumstances a very usef u1 meeting place, a system of diplomatic conferences which meet  under  the  name of the League  of  Nations  Council  and  the  Assembly  of the  League of Nations. These bodies are linked  to  a  technical  bureau,  that  of the Secretariat. As I have already shown elsewhere,'* this establish- ment is not a league, but possibly  an  alliance. The  genuine  concept of humanity is expressed in it only insofar as its  actual  activities reside in the humanitarian  and  not  in  the  political  field,  and  only as an interstate administrative community does it at least have a tendency toward a meaningful universality. But in view of the League’s true constitution and because this so-called League still enables wars to be fought, even this tendency is an ideal postulate only. A league of  nations  which  is not  universal  can  only  be polit-
°* Die Kern frage des Vâl §erbundes (Berlin: Ferd. Diimmler, 9z6) .
The Conce pt of the Political	57
ically significant when it represents a  potential  or  actual  alliance, i.e., a coalition. The jet belli would not thereby be  abolished  but, more or less, totally or partially, transferred to the alliance. A  league of nations as a concrete existing universal  human  organization would, on the contrary, have to accomplish the difhcult task of, first, effectively taking away the /oi belli from all the still existing hu man groupings, and, second, simultaneously not assuming the jot belli itself. Otherwise, universality, humanity, depoliticalized society—in short, all essential characteristics—would again be eliminated.
Were a world state to embrace the entire globe and humanity, then it would  be  no political entity and could only  be loosely called a state. If, in fact, all humanity and  the entire  world  were  to become a unified entity based exclusively on economics and on technically regulating traffic, then it still would not be more of  a social  entity than a social entity of tenants in a tenement house, customers pur- chasing gas from the same utility company, or  passengers  traveling on the same bus. An interest group concerned exclusively with eco- nomics or trafhc cannot  become  more  than  that, in  the absence  of an adversary. Should that interest group also want to become  cul- tural, ideological, or otherwise more ambitious, and yet  remain strictly nonpolitical, then it would be a neutral consumer or producer co-operative moving  between the  poles  of  ethics  and  economics.  It would know neither state nor kingdom  nor  empire,  neither republic nor monarchy, neither aristocracy nor democracy, neither protection nor obedience, and would altogether lose its political character.
The  acute question  to pose is  upon  whom  will fall  the fright-
ening power implied in a world-embracing economic and technical organization. This question can by no means be dismissed  in  the belief that everything would then function automatically, that things would administer themselves, and  that  a  government  by  people over people would be superfluous because  human  beings  would then  be absolutely  free. For  what  would  they  be free ?  This can be
58	The Conce pt oJ the Political
answered by optimistic or pessimistic conjectures, all of which finally lead to an anthropological profession of faith.




One could test all theories  of  state  and  political  ideas  accord- ing to their  anthropology  and  thereby  classify  these  as  to  whether they consciously or  unconsciously  presuppose  man  to  be  by  nature evil or  by  nature  good.  The  distinction  is  to  be  taken  here  in  a rather summary fashion and not in any specifically moral or  ethica1 sense. The  problematic  or  unproblematic  conception  o(  man  is decisive for the presupposition  of  every  further  political  considera- tion,  the  answer  to  the  question  whether  man  is  a  dangerous  being or not, a risky or a harmless creature.
[Schmitt’s  Note J
The numerous modifications and variations of this anthro- pological distinction of good and evil are not  reviewed  here  in detail. Evil may appear as corruption, weakness, cowardice,  stupid- ity, or also as brutality, sensuality, vitality, irrationality, and so on. Goodness may appear in corresponding variations as reasonableness, perfectibility, the capacity of being manipulated, of being taught, peaceful, and so forth. Striking in this context is the political signifi- cance of animal fables. Almost all can be applied to a real political situation: the problem of aggression  in  the  fable  of the  wolf  and the lamb; the question of guilt for  the  plague  in  La  Fontaine’s fable, a guilt which of course falls upon the donkey; justice between states in the fables of  animal assemblies;  disarmament  in Churchill’s
election  speech  of  October  i9z8,  which  depicts  how  every animal
believes that its teeth, claws, horns are only instruments for main- taining peace; the large fish which devour the small ones, etc. This curious analogy can be explained by the direct connection of political anthropology  with what the political  philosophers of  the seventeenth
The Concept of the Political	59
century   (Hobbes,   Spinoza,   Pufendorf)   called   the   state   of   nature. I n it, states exist  among  themselves  in  a  condition  of  continual danger, and their acting  subjects  are  evil  for  precisely  the  same reasons as animals who are stirred  by  their  d rives  (hunger,  greedi- ness, fear,  jealousy) .  It  is  unnecessary  to  differ  with  Wilhelm Dilthey: “Man according to Machiavelli is not by mat ure evil. Some places seem to indicate this....  But  what  Machiavelli  wants  to express everywhere is that man, if not checked, has an irresistible inclination to slide from passion  to  evil:  an ima lity,  rlrives,  passions are the kernels of human  nature—above  all  love  and  fear.  Machia- velli  is  inexha ustible  in  his  psychological  observations  of  the   play of passions.... From this principal feature  of  human  nature  he derives the Iundamenta 1 law of all {Political life.” °“  In  the  chapter “Der  Machtmensch”  in   L.ebens|ormen ”   Eduard   Spranger   says: “For the politician the  science  of  man  is  naturally  of  [crime  inter- est.”  It  appears   to  me,  however,   that  Springer   takes   too   technical a view of this interest, as interest in the tactica I manipulation of instinctive  drives.  In  the  further  elaboration   of   this  chapter,   which is crammed full of ideas  and  observations,  there  can  be  recognized time and again the specifically political phenomena and the entire existentiality of  the  political.  For  example,  the  sentence  “the  dignity of power appears to grow with its sphere of influence” relates to :i phenomenon which is rooted in the sphere of the political and can therefore be  understood  only  politically.  It  is,  to  be  sure,  applicable to  the  following  thesis:  the  weight  of   the   political   is   determined by the intensity of alignments according to which the decisive asso- ciations and dissociations adjust themselves. Also Hegel’s proposition concerning the dialectical change of quantity into quality is com- prehensible  in  the  context  of  political  thought   only   (see   the  note on Hegel, pp. 6z—63). Helmuth Plessner, who as the first modern
°* Gesam melte 5cñi’i/ten, 3rd ed. (Berlin: Verlag von B. G. Teubner, '9°3) , II, 3'-
°° 6th ed. (Halle: Max Nicmeyer, i 922) .
6o	The (oncept oJ the Political
philosopher in his book back r und menschliche Natur 27 dared to advance a political anthropology of a grand style, correctly says that there exists no philosophy and no anthropology which is not polit- ically relevant, just as there is no philosophically irrelevant politics. He has recognized in  particular  that  philosophy  and  anthropology, as specifically applicable to the totality of knowledge,  cannot,  like any specialized discipline, be neutralized against irrational life decisions. Man, for Plessner, is “primarily a being capable of  creat- ing distance” who in his  essence  is  undetermined,  unfathomable, and remains an “open cJuestion.” If one bears in mind the anthro- pological distinction of evil and good and combines Plessner’s “re- maining open” with his positive reference to  danger,  Plessner’s theory is closer to evil than to goodness. This thesis  coincides  with the fact that Hegel and Nietzsche  too  belong  on  the  side  of  evil, and finally power itself (according to Burckhardt’s  well-known  and by no means unambiguous expression) is also something evil.
I have pointed out several times 2' that the antagonism be-  tween the so-called authoritarian and anarchist theories can be traced to these formulas. A part of the theories and postulates which pre- suppose man to be good is liberal. Without being actually anarchist they are polemically directed against the intervention of the state. Ingenuous anarchism reveals that  the belief  in  the natural goodness of man is closely tied to the radical denial of state and government. One follows from the other, and both foment each other. For the liberals, on the other hand, the goodness of man signifies  nothing more than an argument with whose aid the state is made to serve society. This means that society determines its own order and  that state and government are subordinate and must be distrustingly
" (Berlin: Junker & Diinnhaupt. •93' )-
2" Po/ifiJcñe  Theolo gie, pm    s      .;  Die  Di)tatur:  Von  den  An fân gen  des
modernen  Souveranitatsgedan  fens  his  sum   proletarischen   Klassen)am pJ (Munich:  Duncker  &  Humblot,  '9°'   '9•  ;  Berlin,   •96d),  PP-  9•   I °9,   112   ., 123, I q8.
The   Conce pt  of  the   Political	6i
controlled  and  bound  to  precise  limits.  The  classical  formulation by Thomas Paine says: society is the result of our reasonably regu- lated needs, government is the result of our wickedness.°" The radicalism vis-u-vis state and  government  grows  in  proportion  to  the radical belief in the goodness of man’s nature. Bourgeois lib- eralism was never radical in a political sense. Yet it remains self- evident that liberalism’s negation of state and the political, its neu- tralizations, depoliticalizations, and declarations of freedom have likewise a certain political  meaning,  and  in  a  concrete  situation these are polemically directed against a specific state and its political power. But this is neither a political theory nor a political idea. Although liberalism has not radically denied the state, it has, on the other hand, neither advanced a positive theory  of  state  nor  on  its  own discovered how to reform  the state, but  has attempted  only  to  tie the political to the ethical and to subjugate it to economics. It has produced a  doctrine  of  the  separation  and  balance  of  powers,  i.e., a system of checks and controls of  state  and  government.  This  cannot be characterized as either a theory of state or a basic political principle.
What remains is the remarkable and, for many, certainly disc{uieting diagnosis that all genuine political theories presuppose man to be evil, i.e., by no means an unproblematic but  a dangerous  and dynamic being. This can be easily documented in the works of every specific political thinker. Insofar as they reveal themselves as such they all agree on the idea of a problematic human nature, no matter how distinct they are in rank and prominent in  history.  It sufhces here to cite  Machiavelli,  Hobbes,  Bossuet,  Fichte  (as  soon as he forgets his humanitarian idealism), de Maistre, Donoso Cortes,
H. Taine, and Hegel, who, to be sure, at times also shows his double face.
°• See Die Di§tatur,  p.  i if.  The  formulation  by  Babeuf  in  the  Tribun du Peuple: any institution which does  not  presuppose  the  people  to  be  good and  the  officials  corruptible  ...   (is  reprehensible)   is  not  liberal   but   meant in the sense of the democratic identity of ruler and ruled.
6z	The Concept o| the Political

[Schmitt’s  Note J
Hegel, nevertheless, remains every where political in the de- cisive sense. Those of his writings which concern the actual  prob- lems of his time, particular ly the highly gifted work of  his  youth,  Die Verfassun g Deutsch lands, are enduring documentations of the philosophical truth that all spirit is present  spirit.  This  remains visible also through the correctness or incorrectness of Hegel’s ephemeral position on historical events of his time. The  historical spirit does not reside in baroque representations or even in romantic alibis. That is Hegel’s Hic Rhodus and the genuineness of a philoso- phy which  does not permit  the fabrication  of  intellectual  traps under
the pretext  of  apolitical  Purity  and  pure  nonpolitics.  Of  a specifically
political nature also is his dialectic of concrete thinking.  The  often quoted sentence of quantity transforming into  equality  has  a  thor- oughly political meaning. It is an expression  of  the  recognition  that from  every  domain  the  point  of  the  political  is  reached  and  with  it a qualitative new intensity of  human  groupings.  The  actual  appli- cation of this sentence refers to the economic domain and becomes virulent in the nineteenth century. The process  of  such  a  transfor- mation executes itself continuously in the autonomous, so-called politically  neutral  economic  domain.  The  hitherto  nonpolitical   or pure matter of fact now turns political. When it reaches a  certain  quantity, economic property,  for  example,  becomes  obviously  social (or  more  correctly,  political)  power,  proprieté  turns   into   pouvoir, and what is at first only an economically motivated class  antagonism turns into a class struggle of hostile groups.
Hegel also offers the first polemically political  definition  of the bourgeois. The bourgeois is an individual who does not want to leave the apolitical riskless private sphere. He rests in  the possession of his private property, and under the justification of his possessive individualism he acts as an individual against the totality.  He  is  a man who finds his compensation for  his  political  nullity  in  the fruits of freedom and enrichment and above all in the total security
The Conce pt of the Political	6
of its use. Consec{uently he wants to be spared bravery and exempted from the danger of a violent death.“
Hegel has also advanced a definition of the enemy which in general has been evaded by modern philosophers. The enemy is a negated otherness. But  this  negation  is  mutual  and  this  mutuality  of negations has its own concrete existence, as a relation between enemies; this relation of two nothingnesses on both sides bears the danger of war. “This war is not a war  of  families  against  families, but between peoples, and hatrerl becomes thereby undi flere ntiated and freed from all particular personality.” *
The question is how long the spirit of Hegel  has  actually resided in Berlin. In any event, the new political tendency which dominated Prussia after i8qo preferred to avail itself of  a conser va- tive philosophy of state, especially one furnished by Friedrich Julius Stahl, whereas Hegel wandered to  Moscow  via  Karl  Marx  and Lenin. His dialectical  method  became  established  there  and  found its concrete expression in a new  concrete-enemy  concept,  namely  that of the international class enemy, and transformed itself, the dialectical method, as well as everything else, legality and  illegality, the state, even the compromise with the  enemy,  into  a  weapon  of this battle. The actuality of Hegel is very much alive in  Georg Lukics.’1 He cites an expression by Lenin which Hegel would have made with reference to the political entity of a warring  people  in- stead of a class: “Persons, says Lenin, who think of politics as small tricks which at times border on deceit must be decisively refuted. Classes cannot be deceived.”
The question is not settled by psychological comments on optimism or pessimism. It follows according to the anarchist method
°° “Wissenschaftliche Behandlungsarten Yes Naturrechts,” 5âtni/icâr Wer§e (Glockner edition; Stuttgart: FfOmmanns Verlag, •9°7) , I, 499
The translator divided Hegel’s intricate phrases which Schmitt quotes.
The critical reader may contrive a better translation.
3' Geschichte und Klasienbewusstsein (Berlin: Luchter hand, •96b) ,
Lenin (Berlin: Luchter hand, i968).
6q	The Conce pt of the Political
that only individuals who consider man to be evil are evil. Those who consider him to be good, namely the anarchists, are then entitled to some sort of superiority or control over the evil ones. The problem thus begins anew. One must pay more attention to how very different the anthropological presuppositions  are  in  the  various donna ins of human thought. With methodological necessity an educator will consider man capable of  being  educated.  A  jurist  c›f private law starts  with  the  sentence  “one  who  is  presumed  to  be good.” A theologia n ceases to be a theologian when he no longer considers man to be sinful or in need of redemption and no longer distinguishes between the chosen and the nonchosen. The moralist presupposes  a  freedom  of  choice  between  good  and  evil.”  I3eca use the sphere of the political  is  in  the  final  analysis  deter mined  by  the real  possibility  of  enmity,  political  conceptions  and  ideas   can not  very well start with an anthropological optimism. This would dis- solve the possibility of enmity and, thereby, every specific political consequence.
The  connection   of   political   theories   with  theological dogmas
of   sin   which   appear   prominently   in   Bossuet,   Maistre, Bonald,
’ 2 The   liberal  J.  K.  Bl untschli  in  his  Le/t re  vom  modernen  Staat, Part
II I,  Politi)  ale  Wissenscha ft   (Aalen:   Scientia   Verlag,   i965,   ss )   •  S  ••  t• against Stahl’s  doctrine  of  parties  that  jurisprudence  (which  incidentally  has nothing   to  do   with   this  doctrine  of   parties)   does   not   start   from   the  evil ness
of man but  from  the  “golden  rule  of  jurists:  whoever  is  presumed  to  be good,” whereas Stah1, in accordance with t heology, puts at  the  top  of  his thoughts the sinful ness of man. Jurisprudence  for  Bluntschli  is  naturally  civil law  (see  above,  note  i) .  The  golden  rule  of  jurists  derives  its  meaning  from a regulation of the  burden  of  proof.  Moreover,  it  presupposes  that  a  state  exists which has created the external conditions of  morality  by  producing  a normal situation within which man can be good.
" To the extent to which theology becomes moral theology, this freedom-of-choice aspect prevails and weakens the doctrine of the  radical  evil- ness of man. “Men arc free and endowed  with  the  opportunity  to  choose [between  good  and  evil] ;  therefore  it  is  not  true  that  some  [men]  are  good by nature and others  evil  by  nature.”  Irenaeus,  Contra  liaereses  (Bk.  IV,  Ch. 3/, Migne, Patrologia Graeca VII, col. io99) .
The Conccpt of the Political	65
Donoso Cortes, and Friedrich Julius  Stahl,  among  ‹others,  is  ex- plained by the relationship of these necessary presuppositions. The fundamental theological dogma of the evilness of the world and man leads, just as does the distinction of friend and enemy, to a  cate- gorization  of  men  and  makes  impossible  the  undifferentiated optimism of a universal conception of man. In a  good  world  among good people, only peace, security, and harmony prey:i i1. Priests and theologians are here just as super fluous as {Politicians and statesmen. What the denial of original sin means  socially  a nd  from  the  view- point of individ ua1  psychology  has  been  show n  by  Ernst  Troeltsch in his Sozialleh ren der ch ristlich en Kirch en ti nd L“ru p pen .and Seilliére  (in  many  publications  about  romanticism  a net  roma iitics)  in the examples of n umerous sects, heretics,  romantics,  and  anar-  chists. The methodical connection of theological and political pre- suppositions is clear. But theological interference generally confuses political concepts because it shifts the clistinction usually into moral theology. Political thinkers such as Machiavelli, Hobbes,  and  often Fichte presuppose with their  pessimism  only  the  reality  or  possibility of the distinction of  friend  and  enemy.  For  Hobbes,  trul y  a  power- ful  and  systematic  political  thinker,  the  pessimistic  conception  of man is the elementary  presupposition  of  a  specific  system  of  polit- ical thought. He also recognized correctly that the  conviction  of  each side that  it  possesses  the  truth,  the  good,  and  the  just  bring  about the  worst  enmities,  fi nally  the  war  of  all  against  all.  This  fact  is not the product of a frightful and disquieting  fantasy  nor  of  a philosophy based on free  competition  by  a  bourgeois  society  in  its first stage (Tonnies) , but is  the  fundamental  presupposition  of  a specific political philosophy.
These political thinkers are always aware of the concrete possibility of an enemy. Their realism can frighten men in need of security. Without wanting to decide the question of  the  nature  of man one may say in general that as long as man is well off or  will- ing to put up with things, he prefers the illusion of an  undisturbed calm and does not endure pessimists. The political adversaries of a
66	The Concept oJ the Political
clear political theory will, therefore, easily refute political phenomena and truths in the name of some autonomous discipline as amoral, uneconomical, unscientific and above all declare this—and this is politically relevant—a devilry worthy of being combated.
[Schmitt’s  Note]
This misfortune occurred to Machiavelli, who, had he been a Machiavellian, would sooner have written an edifying book than his ill-reputed Prince. In actuality, Machiavelli was on the defensive as was also his country, Italy, which in the sixteenth century had been invaded by Germans, Frenchmen, Spaniards, and  Turks.  At  the begin ning of the nineteenth century the situation of the ideological defensive was repeated in Germany—during the revolutionary and Napoleonic invasions of the French. When it became  important  for the German people to defend themselves against  an  expanding enemy armed with a humanitarian ideology, Machiavelli was reha- bilitated by Fichte and Hegel.
The worst confusion arises when concepts such as justice and freedom are used to legitimize one’s own political ambitions and to disqualify or demoralize the enemy. I n the shadow of an embracing political decision and in the security of a stable political state or- ganization, law, whether private or public, has its own relatively independent domain. As with  every  domain  of  human  endeavor and thought, it can be utilized to support  or  refute  other  domains. But it is necessary to pay attention to the political meaning of such utilisations of law and morality, and above all of the word rule or sovereignty of law.
First, law can signify here the existing positive laws and law- giving methods which should continue to be valid. In  this case  the rule of law means nothing else than the legitimization of a specific status ‹fuo, the preservation of which interests particularly those whose political power or economic  advantage  would  stabilize itself in this law. Second, appealing to law can signify that a higher or
The   Conce pt  of  the  Political	6
better law,  a  so-called  natural  law  or  law  of  reason,  is  set  against the law of the iiniiis quo.  In  this  case  it  is  clear  to  a  politician  that the rule or sovereignty of this type of law signifies the rule and sovereignty of men or groups who can appeal to this higher law and thereby decide its  content  and  how  and  by  whom  it  should  be applied. Hobbes has drawn these simple consequences  of  political thought  without  confusion  and  more  clearly  than   anyone  else.  He has emphasized time  and  again  that  the  sovereignty  of  law  means only the sovereignty of men who  draw  up  a nd  administer  this  law. The rule of  a  higher  order, according  to  Hobbes,  is  an  empty  phrase if it does not signify politically that certain  men  of  this  higher  order rule over  men  of  a  lower  order.  The  independence  and  complete- ness  of   political.  thought   is  here  irrefutable.  There  always  are  con-
.crete human groupings which fight other concrete human  group-  ings in the name of justice, humanity, order, or peace. When being reproached for immorality and cynicism, the spectator of political phenomena can always recognize in such reproaches a political weapon used in actual combat.
Political thought and political instinct prove themselves theoretically and practically in the ability to distinguish friend and enemy. The high points of politics  are simultaneously  the  moments in which the enemy is, in concrete clarity, recognized as the enemy.
[Schmitt’s  Note]
With regard to modern times, there are many powerful out- breaks of such enmity: there is the by no means harmless écrasez f’in/arm of the eighteenth century; the fanatical hatred of Napoleon felt by the German barons Stein and K leist (“Exterminate them [the French], the Last Judgment will not ask you for your rea- sons”) ; Lenin’s annihilating sentences against bourgeois and west- ern capitalism. All these are surpassed by Cromwell’s enmity towards papist Spain. He says in his speech of September ry,  i6$6: “The first thing, therefore, that I shall speak to is That that is the first lesson of Nature: Being and Preservation.... The conservation of
68	The Concept of the Political
that, ‘namely of our National Being,’ is first to be  viewed  with respect to those  who seek  to undo it, and so make  it not to be.” Let  us thus consider our enemies, “the Enemies to the  very  Being  of these Nations” (he always repeats this “very Being” or “National Being” and then proceeds) :. “Why, truly, your great Enemy is the Spaniard. He is a natural enemy. He  is naturally  so;  he is  naturally  so throughout,—by reason of that enmity that is in him against whatsoever is of God. ‘Whatsoever is of God’ which is in you, or which may be in you.” Then he repeats: “The Spaniard is your enemy,” his “enmity is put into him by God.” He is “the natural enemy, the providential enemy,” and he who considers him to be an “accidental enemy” is “not well acc{uainted with Scripture a nd the things of God,” who says: “ ‘I will put  enmity  between  your  seed and her seed’ ” (Gen. III: i$) .  With  France  one  can  make  peace, not with Spain because it is a papist state, and the pope maintains  peace only as long as he wishes.“
But also vice versa: everywhere in  political history, in foreign as well as in domestic  politics,  the incapacity  or  the  unwillingness to make this distinction is a symptom of the political end. In Russia, before the Revolution, the doomed classes romanticized the Russian peasant as good, brave, and Christian muzhik. A relativistic bour- geoisie in a confused Europe searched all sorts of exotic cultures for the purpose of making them an object of its aesthetic consumption. The aristocratic society in France before the Revolution of i 289 sentimentalized “man who is by nature good” and the virtue of the masses. Tocqueville recounts this situation 3’ in words whose shud- dering tension arises in him from a specific political pathos: nobody scented the revolution; it is incredible to see the security and un- suspiciousness with which these privileged spoke of the goodness,
mildness, and innocence of the people when i 93 Was already upon them—spectacle ridicule ct terrible.
^* Oliver Crom well’s Letters and S perches  (Carlyle edition;  New  York: E.  P.  Dutton  ñ  Co.,   9  7)	PP' '49 '5 0 , 15 I, I§3.
^ ^ k’Ancie n Regime ct la rc solution, p. zz8.
The  Concept  of  the Political	

8

Liberalism * has changed all political conceptions in a peculiar and systematic Iashion. Like any other significant hum:in movement liberalism too, as a historical force,  has failed  to  elude  the  political. Its neutralisations and depoliticalizations  (of  education,  the  econ- omy, etc.) are, to be sure, of political significance. Liberals of all countries have engaged in politics just as  other  parties  and  have  in the most different ways  coalesced  with  nonliberal  elements  and ideas. There are national liberals, social liberals, free conservatives, liberal Catholics, and so on.” I n  particular  they  have  tied  them- selves to very illiberal, essentially political, and even democratic movements leading to the total state.'7 But the question is whether a
This section rests on Schmitt’s clear-cut distinction between liberalism and democracy, which he had already developed in i gz3 (Die geistesgeschich t- liche   Lage  des  heutigen  Parlamentarismus   (Munich:   Duncker   &  Humblot,  i 9z3, i 9z6; Berlin, i 96i, i 969) . I t is his assertion that liber alisna destroys democracy and democracy liberalism.
'•  The  combinations   could  easily   be  multiplied.   €ierman romanticism
from i 8oo until 1830 is a traditional and feudal liberalism. Sociologically speaking, it is a modern bourgeois movement in which the citizenr y was not sufficiently  powerful  to do away  with  the  then  existing  political  power bathed
in feudal tradition. Liberalism therefore  wanted  to  coalesce  w'ith  tradition as, later on, with the essentially democratic nationalism and socialism. No specific political theory can be derived from consequent bourgeois liberalism. That is the final reason why romanticism cannot  possess  a  political  theory but always accommodates itself to contemporaneous political energies.} H isto- rians, such as G. von Below, who always want to see only a conservative romanticism must ignore the palpable historical associations. The three great literary heralds of typical liberal parliamentarianism are typical romantics: Burke, Chateaubriand, and Benjamin Constant.
°'  On  the  contrast  of  liberalism   and  democracy  see  Carl  Schmitt,  Die
geistesgeschich tliche  Lage,  znd  ed.  (•9•*)   PP   '3    .;  furthermore,  the  ar ticle
t This topic has been exhaustively treated by Schmitt in his Politische Romanti §, znd ed. (Munich: Duncker & Humblot, '9 25i Berlin, i968) . See particularly the preface.
?	The Conce pt of the Political
specific political idea can be derived from the  pure and  consequen- tial concept of individualistic liberalism. This is to be denied.
The negation of the political, which is inherent in every  con- sistent individualism, leads necessarily to a  political  practice  of  dis- trust toward all conceivable political forces and forms of state and government, but  never  produces  ort  its  own  a  positive  theory  of state, government, and politics.  As  a  result,  there  exists  a  liberal policy in the form of a polemical  antithesis  against  state,  church,  or other institutions which restrict individual  freedom.  There  exists  a liberal policy  of  trade,  church,  and  education,  but  absolutely  no liberal politics, only  a  liberal  critique  of  politics.  The  systematic theory of liberalism concerns  almost  solely  the  inter nal  struggle against the power of the state. For the purpose  of  protecting  i ndi-  vidual freedom and private property, liberalism provides a series r›f methods for hindering and controlling the state’s and  government’s power. It makes of the state a compromise and of its institutions a ventilating system a nd, moreover, balances  monarchy  against democracy and vice  versa.  In  critical  times—particularly  i8qS—this led to such a contradictory position that all good observers, such  as Lorenz von  Stein,  Karl  Marx,   Friedrich   Julius   Stahl,   Donoso Cortés, despaired of trying to find here a political principle or an intellectually consistent idea.
In a very systematic fashion liberal thought evades or ignores state and politics and moves instead in a typical always recurring polarity of two heterogeneous spheres, namely ethics and economics, intellect and trade, education and property. The critical  distrust  of state and politics is easily explained by the principles of a system whereby  the  individual  must  remain  terminus  a  qua   and terminus
by F. Ti›nnies, “Demok ratie und Parlamentarismus,” Schmollers Wah i buch, Vol.  5 i,   No.  z   (1927)    PP    I —qd.  He   recognizes   the  sharp  division   between liberalism  and  democracy.  See  also  the  very  interesting  article  by  H.   Hefele,
“Dernokratie und Liberalism us,” Hochla nd I (October i9•4l s‹—43- On the connection of democracy and the total state see above, pp. zz—z5.
The    Conce pt  of the  Political	7I
at qrem. In  case  of  need,  the  political  entity  must  demand  the sacrifice of life. Such a demand is in no way j ustifiable by the indi- vidualism of liberal thought.  No  consistent  individualism  ca n  en trust to someone other than to  the  individual  himself  the  right  to  d is pose of the physical life of  the  individual.  An  individualism  in  which anyone other  than  the  free  individual  himself  were  to  decide  upon the  substance  and  dimension  of  his  freedom  would  be  only   an empty phrase. For the individual  as  such  there  is  no  enemy  with whom he must enter  into  a  life-and-death  struggle  if  he  personally does not want to do so. To compel  him  to  fight  against  his  will  is, from the viewpoint of the private individual, lack of freedom a nd repression. All liberal pathos turns against repression ancl lack ‹›f freedom.  Every  encroachment,  every  threat  to   individual   freedom and private property and  free competition  is called  repres5iOll  a nd  is eo i pso something evil. What this liberalism still admits of state, government, and politics is confined to securing  the  conditions  for liberty and eliminating inf ringements on freedom.
We thus arrive at an entire system of demilitarized and cle politicalized concepts. A few  may  here  be  enumerated  in  order  to show the incredibly coherent systematics of liberal thought, which,  despite  all  reversals,   has  still   not   been   replaced   in   Europe   today [ I g32]. These liberal concepts typically move between ethics (in- tellectuality) and  economics  (trade) .  From  this  polarity  they  attempt to an nihilate the political as a domain of conquering power and repression. The concept of private law serves  as  a  lever  and  the  no- tion of private property forms the center of the globe, whose poles— ethics and economics—are only the contrasting emissions from this central point.
Ethical or  moral pathos and  materialist  economic  reality com-
bine in every typical liberal manifestation and give every political concept a double face. Thus the political concept of battle in liberal thought becomes competition in the domain of economics and dis- cussion in the intellectual realm. Instead of a clear distinction be- tween  the two different  states,  that  of  war  and  that of  peace, there
1^	The Conce pt of the Political
appears the dynamic of perpetual competition and perpetual dis- cussion. The state turns into society: on the ethical-intellectual side into an ideological humanitarian conception  of  humanity,  and  on the other into an economic-tech nical system of  production  and trafhc. The self-understood will to repel the enemy in a given battle situation turns into a  rationally  constructed  social ideal or  program,  a tendency or an economic calculation. A politically united people becomes, on the one hand, a culturally interested public, and, on the other, partially an industrial concern and its employers, partially  a mass of consumers. At the intellectual pole, government and power turns into propaganda and mass manipulation, and at the economic pole, control.
These dissolutions aim with great precision  at  subjugating state and politics, partially into an individualistic domain of  private law and morality, partially into economic notions. In doing so they deprive state and politics of their specific meaning. Outside of the political, liberalism not only recognizes with self-evident logic the autonomy of different h uman realms but drives them toward spe- cialization and even toward complete isolation. That art  is a  daugh- ter of freedom, that aesthetic value judgment is absolutely auton- omous, that artistic genius is sovereign—all this is axiomatic of liberalism. In some countries a genuine liberal pathos  came  to  the fore only when this autonomous freedom of art was endangered by moralistic apostles of tradition. Morality became autonomous  vis-a- vis metaphysics and religion, science vis-a-vis religion, art, and morality, etc. The most important example of  such  an autonomy  is the validity of norms and laws of economics. That production and consumption, price formation and market  have  their  own  sphere  and can be directed neither by ethics nor aesthetics, nor by religion, nor, least of all, by politics was considered one of the few truly un- questionable dogmas of this liberal age. With great passion political viewpoints were deprived of every validity and subjugated to the norms and orders of morality, law, and economics. In the concrete reality of the political, no abstract orders or norms but always real
The Conce pt of the Political	73
human groupings and associations rule over  the  other  human  group- ings and associations. Politically, the rule of morality,  law,  and economics always assumes a concrete political meaning.
[Schmitt’s  Note]
Note (unchanged from the year i 9zy) :  The  ideological  struc- ture  of  the  Peace  of  Versailles  corresponds  precisely   to  this polarity
of ethical pathos and economic calculation. Article 23i forces the German Reich to recognize its responsibility  for  all  war  damages and losses. This establishes a foundation for a juridic and moral value judgment. Avoided are such political concepts as annexation. The cession of Alsace-Lorraine is a desannexion, in other words a restitu- tion of an injustice. The cession of Polish and  Danish  territories serves the ideal claim of the nationality principle. The seizure of the colonies is even proclaimed (Article 22) to be an act of selfless humanity. The economic counterpole of this idealism is reparations, i.e., a continuous and unlimited economic exploitation of the van- quished. The result is that such a treaty could not realize a political concept such as freedom, and therefore it became  necessary to  initiate  new  “true”  peace  treaties:  the  London  Protocol  of  August i 9zq (Dawes Plan), Locarno of October iQ25, entry into the League
of Nations in September 92W the series is not at an end yet.
The word repression is utilized in liberal theory as a reproach against state and  politics: This  would  have  been  nothing more than a powerless curse word of political debate if it had not been inte- grated into a large metaphysical and historical system. It gained thereby a broader horizon and a stronger moral conviction. The enlightened eighteenth century believed in a clear and  simple  up- ward line of human progress. Progress should above all result in the intellectual and moral perfection of humanity. The line moved be- tween two points: from religious fanaticism to intellectual  liberty, from dogma to criticism, from superstition to enlightenment, from darkness to light. In the first half of the nineteenth century, two
14	The Conce pt of the Political
symptomatic triple-structured constructions appear: Hegel’s dialecti- cal succession (family—civil society—state) and Comte’s three stages (from theology via metaphysics to positive science) . The triple struc- ture weakens the polemical punch of the double-structured an-  tithesis. Therefore, soon after a period of order, exhaustion, and at- tempts at restoration, when the battle began again, the simple double-structured antithesis prevailed immediately. Even in Ger- many, where it was not meant to be warlike, Hegel’s triple-structured scheme was pushed aside in the second part of the  nineteenth  cen- tury in  favor  of  the  dual  one,  domination  and  association   (in Gier ke), or community and society (in Tonnies) .
The most conspicuous and  historically  the  most  effective example is the antithesis formulated by Karl Marx: bourgeoisie and proletariat. This antithesis  concentrates  all  antagonisms  of  world history into one single final  battle  against  the  last  enemy  of  hu- manity.  It  does  so  by  integrating  the  many  bourgeois  parties   on earth into a single order, on the  one  hand,  and  likewise  the  pro- letariat,  on  the  other.  By  so  doing  a  mighty  friend-enemy  grouping is forged. Its  power  of  conviction  during  the  nineteenth  century resided above all in the  fact  that  it  followed  its  liberal  bourgeois enemy into its own domain, the economic, and  challenged  it,  so  to speak, in its home territory  with  its  own  weapons.  This  was  neces- sary because the turning toward  economics  was  decided  by  the  vic- tory  of  industrial  society.  The  year  of  this  victory,  i8 iq,  was  the year in  which  England  had  triumphed  over  the  military  imperialism of Napoleon. The most simple  and  transparent  theory  of  this  his- torical development is advanced by H.  Spencer.  He  sees  human  his- tory as a development from the military-feudal to the industrial- commercial society. But the first already systematic expression, the treatise De l’esprit de con quete, had been published in  z S it  by Benjamin Constant, the initiator of the whole liberal spirit of the nineteenth century.
In the eighteenth century the idea of progress was primarily humanitarian moral and intellectual, it was a spiritual progress; in
The Concept of the Political	75
the nineteenth it became economic-industrial-technological. This mutation is decisive. It was believed that  the economy  is the vehicle of   this  ver7  Complex  development.  Economy,  trade  and  industry,
technological   perfection,   freedom,   and   rationalization   were con-
sidered allies. Despite its offensive thrust against feudalism, reaction, and the police state, it was judged as essentially peaceful, in contrast  to warlike force and repression. The characteristic nineteenth-cen- tury scheme is thereby formed:


Freedom, progress
and reason
in  alliance with
economy, industry and technology

ga     ainst

against

feudalism, reaction and force
in alliance with
state, war and
politics

as	as
parliamentarianism	against	dictatorship.

The complete inventory of this system of antitheses and their possible combinations is contained in the i8 iq treatise by Benjamin Constant. He maintains that we are in an age which must necessarily replace the age of wars, just as the age of wars had necessarily to precede it. Then follows the characterization of both ages: the  one aims at winning the goods of life by peaceful exchange  (obtenir de  gré â gre), the other by war and repression. This is the impo/iioo sausage, the other, on the contrary, /e calcul civilisé. Since war and conquest are not procuring amenities and comforts, wars are thereby no longer useful, and the victorious war is also bad business for the victor. Moreover, the enormous development of modern war tech- nology (Constant cites particularly the artillery upon which the technological superiority of the Napoleonic armies rested primarily) made senseless everything which had previously been considered in war heroic, glorious, personal courage, and delight in fighting. Ac- cording to Constant’s conclusion, war has lost every usefulness as
y6	The Concept of the Political
well as every attraction; l’hom me n’est plus entrai’ne â i’y livrer, ni par interet, ni par passion. In the past, the warring nations had sub- jugated the trading peoples; today it is the other way round.
The extraordinarily intricate coalition of economy, freedom, technology, ethics, and  parliamentarianism  has  long  ago  finished off its old enemy: the residues of the absolute state and a feudal aristocracy; and with the disappearance of the enemy it has lost its original meaning. Now new groupings and coalitions appear. Economy is no longer eo i pso freedom; technology does not serve comforts only, but just as much the  production  of  dangerous weapons and instruments. Progress no longer produces eo ipio the humanitarian and moral  perfection  which  was  considered  progress in the eighteenth century. A technological rationalization can be the opposite of an economic rationalization. Nevertheless, Europe’s spiritual atmosphere continues to remain until  this  very  day  under the spell of this nineteenth-century historical interpretation. Until recently its formulas and concepts retained  a  force  which  appeared to survive the death of its old adversary.
[Schmitt’s  Note]
The best example of this polarity of state and society is con- tained in the theses of Fra nz Oppenheimer.  He  declares  his aim  to be the destruction of the state. His liberalism is so radical that he no longer permits the state to be even an armed ofhce guard. The de- struction is effected by advancing a value- and passion-ridden definition. The concept of state should be determined by political means, the concept of society (in essence nonpolitical) by economic means. But the qualifications by which  political  and  economic means are then defined  are  nothing  more  than  typical  expressions of that pathos against  politics and  state. They  swing in  the  polarity of ethics and economics and unveil polemical antitheses in which is mirrored the nineteenth-century German polemical tension of  state and society, politics and economy. The economic way is declared  to be reciprocity of production and consumption, therefore mutuality,
The Conce pt of the Political	71
equality, justice, and freedom, and finally nothing less than the spiritual union of fellowship, brother liness, and justice." The politi- cal way appe:irs on the other hand as  a  conquering  power  outside the domain of economics, namely, thieves y, conquest, and crimes of all sorts. A hierarchical value system of the relation of state  and society is maintained. But  whereas Hegel’s systematized  conception of the German state in the nineteenth century considered it to be a realm of morality and objective reason high above the appetitive domain of egoistic society, the value judgment is now turned around. Society as a sphere of peaceful justice now stands infinitely higher than the state, which is degraded to a region  of  brutal  immorality. The roles are changed, the apotheosis remains.
But this in actuality is not permissible and neither moral nor psychological, least of all scientific, tp simply define by moral dis- qualifications, by confronting the good, the just, and  the  peaceful with filthy, evil, rapacious, and criminal politics. With such methods one could just as well the other way around define politics as the sphere of honest rivalry and economics as a world of deception. The connection of politics with thievery, force, and repression is, in the final analysis, no more precise than is the connection of economics with cunning and deception. Exchange and  deception  are often  not far apart. A domination of men based upon pure economics must appear a terrible deception if, by remaining nonpolitical, it thereby evades political responsibility and visibility. Exchange by no means precludes the possibility that one of the contractors experiences a disadvantage and that a system of mutual contracts finally de- teriorates into a system of the worst exploitation and  repression. When the exploited and the repressed  attempt  to defend  themselves in such a situation, they cannot do so by economic means. Evidently, the possessor of economic power would consider every attempt to change its power position by extra-economic means as violence and
3^ See the compilation by Fritz Sander, “Gesellschaft und Staat, Studie zur Gcsellschaftslchre von Franz Oppenheimer,” Archiv fiir Sozialwissen- ichaJt, 56 (•926) 38d 3 5-
y8	The Concept o| the Political
crime, and will seek  methods  to hinder  this. That ideal  construction of a society based on exchange and mutual contracts and, eo i pso, peaceful and just is thereby eliminated. Unfortunately, also, usurers and extortioners appeal to the inviolability of contracts and to the sentence pacta sunt servanda. The domain of exchange  has its nar- row limits and its specific categories, and not all things possess an exchange value. No matter how large the financial  bribe  may  be, there is no money equivalent for political freedom and political independence.
State and politics cannot be exterminated. The world will not become depoliticali zed with the aid of definitions and constructions, all of which circle the polarity of ethics anal economics. Economic antagonisms can become political, and the fact that an economic  power position could arise proves that  the point of  the political may be reached from the economic as well as  from  any  other  domain. The often quoted phrase by Walter Rathenau, namely  that  the  destiny today is not politics but economics, originated in this context. It would be more exact to say that politics continues to remain the destiny, but what has occurred is that economics has become political and thereby the destiny.
It is also erroneous to believe that a political position founded on economic superiority is “essentially unwar like,” as Joseph Schum- peter says in his Zur Soziologie der Imperialismen." Essentially un- warlike is the terminology based on the essence of liberal  ideology. An imperialism based on pure economic power will naturally at- tempt to sustain a worldwide condition  which  enables  it  to  apply and manage, unmolested, its economic means, e.g.,  terminating credit, embargoing raw materials, destroying the currencies of others, and so on. Every attempt of a people to withdraw itself from  the effects of such “peaceful” methods is considered  by this imperialism as extra-economic power. Pure economic imperialism will also apply
’° (Tiibingen: J. C. Mohr [Paul Siebeck] , 19'9)
The Conce pt of the Political	79
a stronger, but still economic, and therefore (according to this termi- nology) non political, esse ntially peaceful means of force. A ig2I League of Nations resol ntion “ enu me rates as examples: economic sanctions and severance of the foocl supply I rom the civilian popula- tion. Finally, it has sufhcie nt technical means to brings about violent death. Modern means of an nihilation have been produced  by enormous investments of capital and intelligence, surely to be used if necessary.
For the application of such urea us, a  new and  essentially  paci- fist v‹ cabulary has been created. War is condemned but executions, sanctions, punitive expeditions,  pacifications,  protection  of  treaties, inter national police, and measures to assure peace remain.  The  ad- versar y is thus no  longer  called  an  enemy  but  a  disturber  of peace and is  thereby  designated  to  be  an  outlaw  of  humanity.  A  war waged to protect or expand economic power must, with the aid of propaganda, turn into a crusade  and into  the  last  war  of  humanity.  This is implicit in the pr›larity of ethics and economics, a polarity astonishingly systematic and consistent. H ut  this  allegedly  non- political and apparently even a ntipolitical system serves existing  or newly emerging friend-and-enemy groupings and  cannot  escape  the logic of the political.
*° Number i 4 ° f the second gathering, “guicielines” to carrying out Article i6 of the Covenant.



THE AGE OF NEUTRALIZATIONS AND DEPOLITICIZATIONS (1929)

Carl Schmitt


We in Central Europe live “sous l’oeil des Russes.” For a century their psychological gaze has seen through our great words and institutions. Their vitality is strong enough to seize our knowledge and technology as weapons. Their prowess in ratio- nalism and its opposite, as well as their potential for good and evil in orthodoxy, is overwhelming. They have realized the union of Socialism and Slavism, which already in 1848 Donoso Cortès said would be the decisive event of the next century.1
This is our situation. We can no longer say anything worth- while about culture and history without ﬁrst becoming aware of our own cultural and historical situation. That all historical knowledge is knowledge of the present, that such knowledge ob- tains its light and intensity from the present and in the most pro- found sense only serves the present, because all spirit is only spirit of the present, has been said by many since Hegel, best of all by Benedetto Croce. Along with many famous historians of the last generation, we have the simple truth before our eyes. There is no longer anyone today who would be deceived by the accumulation of facts as to how much of historical representation and construc-

Translated by Matthias Konzett and John P. McCormick from “Das Zeitalter der Neutralisierungen und Entpolitisierungen (1929),” in Carl Schmitt, Der Begriff des Politischen: Text von 1932 mit einem Vorwort und drei Corollarien (Berlin: Dunker & Humblot, 1963), pp. 79 – 95.
1 Cf. Carl Schmitt, Donoso Cortès in gesamteuropäischer Interpretation: Vier Aufsätze (Cologne: Greven Verlag, 1950), pp. 61ff. and 77ff.
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	81
tion is fulﬁlled by naive projections and identiﬁcations. Thus we must ﬁrst be aware of our own historical situation.
The remark about the Russians was intended to remind us of this. Such a conscious assessment is difﬁcult today, but for this reason all the more necessary. All signs point to the fact that in 1929 we in Europe still live in a period of exhaustion and efforts at restoration, as is common and understandable after great wars. Following the allied war against France, which lasted twenty years, almost a whole generation of Europeans was in a similar state of mind, which after 1815 could be reduced to the formula: legitimacy of the status quo. At such a time, all arguments actually entail less the revival of things past or disappearing than a des- perate foreign and domestic policy: the status quo, what else? In the interim, the calm mood of restoration brought forth a rapid and uninterrupted development of new things and new circum- stances whose meaning and direction are hidden behind the re- stored facades. When the decisive moment arrives, the legitimat- ing foreground vanishes like an empty phantom.
The Russians have taken the European nineteenth century
at its word, understood its core ideas and drawn the ultimate con- clusions from its cultural premises. We always live in the eye of the more radical brother, who compels us to draw the practical con- clusion and pursue it to the end. Altogether aside from foreign and domestic policy prognoses, one thing is certain: that the anti- religion of technicity has been put into practice on Russian soil, that there a state arose which is more intensely statist than any ruled by the absolute princes—Philip II, Louis XIV, or Frederick the Great. Our present situation can be understood only as the con- sequence of the last centuries of European development; it com- pletes and transcends speciﬁc European ideas and demonstrates in one enormous climax the core of modern European history.
The Successive Stages of Changing Central Domains
Let us recall the stages in which the European mind has moved over the last four centuries and the various intellectual do- mains in which it has found the center of its immediate human
82	Carl Schmitt
existence. There are four great, simple, secular stages correspond- ing to the four centuries and proceding from the theological to the metaphysical domain, from there to the humanitarian-moral, and, ﬁnally, to the economic domain. Great interpreters of human history, Vico and Comte, generalized this unique European oc- currence into a common law of human development subsequently propagated in thousands of banal and vulgar formulations, such as the “law of three stages”—from the theological to the meta- physical, and from there to the “scientiﬁc” stage or “positivism.” In reality, one cannot positively say more than that since the six- teenth century Europeans moved in several stages from one cen- tral domain to another and that everything which constitutes our cultural development is the result of such stages. In the past four centuries of European history, intellectual life has had four differ- ent centers and the thinking of the active elite which constituted the respective vanguards moved in the changing centuries around changing centers.
The concepts of changing generations can only be under- stood from these shifting centers. It should be emphasized that the shift—from the theological to the metaphysical domain, and from there to the humanitarian-moral and ﬁnally to the economic domain—is not meant as a theory of cultural and intellectual “dominance,” not as a historico-philosophical law in the sense of a law of three stages or similar constructions. I speak not of human culture as a whole, not of the rhythm of world history, and am able to speak neither about the Chinese nor the East Indians or the Egyptians. Thus the successive stages of the changing central domains are conceived neither as a continuous line of “progress” upwards nor the opposite. It is quite another question whether one wishes to interpret this as a succession of stages upwards or downwards, as an ascent or a decline.
Finally, it also would be a misunderstanding to interpret the successive stages in such a way that in each of these centuries there was nothing more than the central domain. On the contrary, there is always a plurality of diverse, already spent stages coexist-
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	83
ing. People in the same age and the same country, even the same family, live together in different stages. For example, today Berlin is culturally closer to New York and Moscow than to Munich or Trier. The changing central domains concern only the concrete fact that in these four centuries of European history the intellec- tual vanguard changed, that its convictions and arguments con- tinued to change, as did the content of its intellectual interests, the basis of its actions, the secret of its political success, and the will- ingness of the great masses to be impressed by certain suggestions.
The transition from the theology of the sixteenth century to the metaphysics of the seventeenth century (which is not only metaphysically but also scientiﬁcally the greatest age of Europe
—the heroic age of occidental rationalism) is as clear and distinct as any unique historical occurrence. This epoch of systematic sci- entiﬁc thinking encompasses Suarez and Bacon, Galileo, Kepler, Descartes, Grotius, Hobbes, Spinoza, Pascal, Leibniz, and New- ton. All the astonishing mathematical, astronomical, and scientiﬁc insights of this age were built into a great metaphysical or “nat- ural” system; all thinkers were metaphysicians on a grand scale, and even the typical superstition was likewise cosmic and rational in the form of astrology.
The eighteenth century shunted metaphysics with the help of the constructions of a deistic philosophy and was a vulgariza- tion on a grand scale—the Enlightenment, literary appropriations of the great accomplishments of the seventeenth century, human- ism, and rationalism. One can follow in detail how Suarez con- tinued to have inﬂuence in many popular works. As for many ba- sic concepts of morality and state theory, Pufendorf is only an epigone of Suarez; in the ﬁnal analysis, Rousseau’s social contract is in turn only a vulgarization of Pufendorf. But the speciﬁc pathos of the eighteenth century is “virtue”; its mythical designa- tion is vertu: duty. Even Rousseau’s romanticism does not yet con- sciously break the frame of moral categories. A typical expression of this century is Kant’s concept of God. As someone once said (rather crudely), in Kant’s system God appears as a “parasite of
84	Carl Schmitt
ethics.” Every word in his Critique of Pure Reason—critique, pure, and reason—is polemically directed against dogma, metaphysics, and ontology.
A secularization followed in the nineteenth century—an ap- parently hybrid and impossible combination of aesthetic-romantic and economic-technical tendencies. In reality, the romanticism of the nineteenth century signiﬁes (if we want to utilize the moder- ately didactic word romanticism in a way different from the phe- nomenon itself, i.e., as a vehicle of confusion) only the intermedi- ary stage of the aesthetic between the moralism of the eighteenth and the economism of the nineteenth century, only a transition which precipitated the aestheticization of all intellectual domains. It did so very easily and successfully. The way from the meta- physical and moral domains is through the aesthetic domain, which is the surest and most comfortable way to the general econ- omization of intellectual life and to a state of mind which ﬁnds the core categories of human existence in production and con- sumption.
In the further development of intellectual life, romantic aestheticism promoted economic thinking and is a typical atten- dant phenomenon. In the nineteenth century, however, techni- cism still appeared in close association with economism as “indus- trialism.” The most typical example of this is the well-known historical and social construction of the Marxist system. It holds that economics is the basis and “foundation” of everything intel- lectual and spiritual. Already in this economic core it clearly rec- ognizes the technical—that the economic epochs of mankind are determined by speciﬁc technical means. Yet the system as such is an economic system in which the technical elements appear only in later vulgarizations. Marxism wants to think in economic terms and thus remains in the nineteenth century, which was eco- nomic to the core.
Already in the nineteenth century technical progress pro- ceeded at such an astonishing rate, even as did social and eco- nomic situations as a consequence, that all moral, political, social, and economic situations were affected. Given the overpowering
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	85
suggestion of ever new and surprising inventions and achieve- ments, there arose a religion of technical progress which promised all other problems would be solved by technological progress. This belief was self-evident to the great masses of the industrial- ized countries. They skipped all intermediary stages typical of the thinking of intellectual vanguards and turned the belief in mira- cles and an afterlife—a religion without intermediary stages— into a religion of technical miracles, human achievements, and the domination of nature. A magical religiosity became an equally magical technicity. The twentieth century began as the age not only of technology but of a religious belief in technology. It is of- ten called the age of technology. But this is only a tentative char- acterization of the whole situation. The question of the signiﬁ- cance of overwhelming technicity should for now be left open, because the belief in technology is in fact only the result of a cer- tain tendency in the shifting of the central domain—as a belief, it is only the result of this shifting.
All concepts of the spiritual sphere, including the concept of spirit, are pluralistic in themselves and can only be understood in terms of concrete political existence. Just as every nation has its own concept of nation and ﬁnds the constitutive characteristics of nationality within itself, so every culture and cultural epoch has its own concept of culture. All essential concepts are not norma- tive but existential. If the center of intellectual life has shifted in the last four centuries, so have all concepts and words. It is thus necessary to bear in mind the ambiguity of every concept and word. The greatest and most egregious misunderstandings (from which, of course, many impostors make their living) can be ex- plained by the erroneous transfer of a concept at home in one do- main (e.g., only in the metaphysical, the moral, or the economic) to other domains of intellectual life. It is not only true that inci- dents and events which make their mark on people and become the object of their personal reﬂections and discussions have refer- ence to the central domain (e.g., Lisbon’s earthquake could occa- sion a whole ﬂood of moralizing literature, whereas today a sim-
86	Carl Schmitt
ilar event would pass almost unnoticed); it is also true that an eco- nomic catastrophe, such as a sharp monetary devaluation or a crash, occasions widespread and acute interest both practical and theoretical.
The speciﬁc concepts of individual centuries also derive their meaning from the respective central domains. One example will sufﬁce. The concept of progress, i.e., an improvement or com- pletion (in modern jargon, a rationalization) became dominant in the eighteenth century, in an age of humanitarian-moral belief. Accordingly, progress meant above all progress in culture, self- determination, and education: moral perfection. In an age of eco- nomic or technical thinking, it is self-evident that progress is eco- nomic or technical progress. To the extent that anyone is still interested in humanitarian-moral progress, it appears as a by- product of economic progress. If a domain of thought becomes central, then the problems of other domains are solved in terms of the central domain—they are considered secondary problems, whose solution follows as a matter of course only if the problems of the central domain are solved.
In a theological age, everything runs smoothly if theological questions are in order; everything else is “provided” by deﬁnition. The same is true of other ages. In a humanitarian-moral age, it is only necessary to inculcate morals, whereby all problems become problems of education. In an economic age, one needs only solve adequately the problem of the production and distribution of goods in order to make superﬂuous all moral and social questions. Mere technical thinking also solves the economic problem with new technical developments. All questions, including the eco- nomic, recede before the task of technical progress.
Another sociological example of the plurality of such con- cepts is the clerc2—the typical representative of intellect and pub-

2 Schmitt clearly uses clerc as his term for the European intellectual / spiri- tual elite in response to Julien Benda’s widely celebrated La Trahison des Clercs (1927). See Benda, The Treason of the Intellectuals, with an introduction by Roger
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	87
licity—whose speciﬁc characteristics are determined in every cen- tury by the central domain. The theologian and preacher of the sixteenth century was followed by the scholarly systematizer of the seventeenth century, who lived in a true scholarly republic and was far removed from the masses. Then followed the authors of the Enlightenment in the still aristocratic eighteenth century. As regards the nineteenth century, one should not be dissuaded by the intermezzo of romantic genius and the many priests of private religion. The clerc of the nineteenth century (ﬁrst and foremost Karl Marx) became an economic expert. The question is how readily economic thinking will permit the sociological type of clerc and whether political economists and reﬁned economic syn- dicates are able to constitute an intellectual elite. In any case, it ap- pears technical thinking can no longer accommodate a clerc.
More will be said below about the age of technicity. But these brief references are enough to evidence the plurality of the clerc as a type. As said above: all concepts such as God, freedom, progress, anthropological conceptions of human nature, the pub- lic domain, rationality and rationalization, and ﬁnally the con- cepts of nature and culture itself derive their concrete historical content from the situation of the central domains and can only be grasped therefrom.
Above all the state also derives its reality and power from the respective central domain, because the decisive disputes of friend-enemy groupings are also determined by it. As long as religious-theological matters were the central focus, the maxim cujus regio ejus religio3 had a political meaning. When religious-


Kimball (Somerset, NJ: Transaction, 2006). Schmitt echoes Benda’s denunciation of an educated class that has abdicated its responsibility to teach and lead the masses, even if he does not necessarily agree with Benda on the content of that in- struction or the goals to which the masses should be led.
3 Literally, this maxim stemming from the religious civil wars means “whose region this religion”; essentially, it means whoever rules a given territory decides on the religion.
88	Carl Schmitt
theoretical matters ceased to dominate the central domain, this maxim also lost its practical import. In the meantime, however, it moved from the cultural stage of the nation and the principle of nationality (cujus regio ejus natio) to the economic domain, where it came to mean: one and the same state cannot accommodate two contradictory economic systems, i.e., capitalism and communism are mutually exclusive. The Soviet state has realized the maxim cujus regio ejus oeconomia in a way which proves that the connec- tion between a compact domain and compact intellectual homo- geneity holds not only for the religious struggle of the sixteenth century and for the majority of small and middle-sized European states but always accommodates the changing central domains and the changing dimensions of autarkic world empires. Essential here is that a homogeneous economic state conforms to economic thinking. Such a state wants to be modern—a state which knows its own time and cultural situation. It must claim to understand historical development as a whole, which is the basis of its right to rule. In an economic age, a state which does not claim to under- stand and direct economic relations must declare itself neutral with respect to political4 questions and decisions and thereby re- nounce its claim to rule.
Now it is remarkable that the European liberal state of the nineteenth century could portray itself as a stato neutrale ed agnos- tico and could see its existential legitimation precisely in its neu- trality. There are various reasons for this; it cannot be explained in one word or by a single cause. Here it is certainly interesting as a symptom of a general cultural neutrality because the nineteenth century doctrine of the neutral state belongs to a general tendency of intellectual neutrality characteristic of European history in the last century. In my view, this is the historical explanation for what
4 In an earlier version of this lecture Schmitt employs the term “social” in- stead of “political.” See “Das Zeitalter der Neutralizierungen und Entpolitisierun- gen,” in Carl Schmitt, Positionen und Begriffe im Kampf mit Weimar—Genf—Ver- sailles 1923 –1939 (1940), Reprint of the First Edition (Berlin: Dunker & Humblot, 1988), p. 126.
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	89
is called the age of technology, which still requires at least a few words of explanation.

The Stages of Neutralization and Depoliticization
The succession of stages—from the theological, over the metaphysical and the moral to the economic—simultaneously signiﬁes a series of progressive neutralizations of domains whose centers have shifted. I consider the strongest and most conse- quential of all intellectual shifts of European history to be the one in the seventeenth century from the traditional Christian theology to “natural” science. Until now this shift has determined the di- rection of all further development. All generalizing “laws” of hu- man history, such as Comte’s law of three stages, Spencer’s devel- opment scheme from the military to the industrial age, and similar historico-philosophical constructions stand in the shadow of this great process. At the core of this astounding shift lies an el- emental impulse that has been decisive for centuries, i.e., the striv- ing for a neutral domain. Following the hopeless theological dis- putes and stuggles of the sixteenth century, Europeans sought a neutral domain in which there would be no conﬂict and they could reach common agreement through the debates and ex- changes of opinion. Thereafter one no longer espoused the con- troversial concepts and arguments of Christian theology and in- stead construed a “natural” system of theology, metaphysics, morality, and law. Dilthey described this process of intellectual history in a justly famous exposition in which he emphasizes above all the great signiﬁcance of the Stoic tradition. But the es- sential point for me is that theology, the former central domain, was abandoned because it was controversial, in favor of another
—neutral—domain. The former central domain became neutral- ized in that it ceased to be the central domain. On the basis of the new central domain, one hoped to ﬁnd minimum agreement and common premises allowing for the possibility of security, clarity, prudence, and peace. Europeans thus moved in the direction of neutralization  and  minimalization,  whereby  they  accepted the
90	Carl Schmitt
law which “kept them in line” for the following centuries and constituted their concept of truth.
Concepts elaborated over many centuries of theological re- ﬂection now became uninteresting and merely private matters. In the metaphysics of eighteenth century deism, God himself was re- moved from the world and reduced to a neutral instance vis-à-vis the struggles and antagonisms of real life. As Hamann5 argued against Kant, he became a concept and ceased to be an essence. In the nineteenth century, ﬁrst the monarch and then the state be- came a neutral power, initiating a chapter in the history of politi- cal theology in the liberal doctrines of the pouvoir neutre and the stato neutrale in which the process of neutralization ﬁnds its clas- sical formula because it also has grasped what is most decisive: po- litical power. But in the dialectic of such a development one cre- ates a new domain of struggle precisely through the shifting of the central domain. In the new domain, at ﬁrst considered neu- tral, the antitheses of men and interests unfold with a new inten- sity and become increasingly sharper. Europeans always have wandered from a conﬂictual to a neutral domain, and always the newly won neutral domain has become immediately another arena of struggle, once again necessitating the search for a new neutral domain. Scientiﬁc thinking was also unable to achieve peace. The religious wars evolved into the still cultural yet already economically determined national wars of the nineteenth century and, ﬁnally, into economic wars.
The  evidence  of  the  widespread  contemporary  belief in
technology is based only on the proposition that the absolute and ultimate neutral ground has been found in technology, since ap- parently there is nothing more neutral. Technology serves every- one, just as radio is utilized for news of all kinds or as the postal service delivers packages regardless of their contents, since its technology can provide no criterion for evaluating them. Unlike


5 Johann Georg Hamann (1730 –1788) was a Protestant critic of the En- lightenment. Like Kant, he was a resident of Königsberg.
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	91
theological, metaphysical, moral, and even economic questions, which are forever debatable, purely technical problems have something refreshingly factual about them. They are easy to solve, and it is easily understandable why there is a tendency to take refuge in technicity from the inextricable problems of all other domains. Here all peoples and nations, all classes and religions, all generations and races appear to be able to agree because all make use of and take for granted the advantages and amenities of tech- nical comforts. Thus this appears to be the ground of a general equalization, which Max Scheler advocated in a 1927 lecture.6 Here all struggles and confusions of religious, national, and social conﬂicts were leveled into a neutral domain. Technology ap- peared to be a domain of peace, understanding, and reconcilia- tion. The otherwise inexplicable link between paciﬁst and techni- cal belief is explained by this turn toward neutralization which the European mind took in the seventeenth century and which, as if by fate, has been pursued into the twentieth century.
But the neutrality of technology is something other than the
neutrality of all former domains. Technology is always only an in- strument and weapon; precisely because it serves all, it is not neu- tral. No single decision can be derived from the immanence of technology, least of all for neutrality. Every type of culture, every people and religion, every war and peace can use technology as a weapon. Given that instruments and weapons become ever more useful, the probability of their being used becomes that much greater. Technical progress need not be either metaphysical or moral and not particularly economic to be progress. If humani- tarian-moral progress is still expected by many today from the

6 Here Schmitt is referring to a lecture Scheler delivered on January 8, 1927 at the Hochschule für Politik in Berlin and then again as part of a public lecture series at the University of Cologne in the summer semester 1927. See “Eigene Lehre von ‘Politik und Moral’ (Hauptgedanken),” in Max Scheler, Schriften aus dem Nachlass, Vol. IV, “Philosophie und Geschichte,” edited by Manfred S. Frings (Bonn: Bouvier Verlag, 1990), pp. 43 –76. Cf. also in the same volume “Bemer- kungen zu den Manuskripten,” pp. 253ff.
92	Carl Schmitt
perfection of technology, it is because technology is magically linked to morality on the somewhat naive assumption that the splendid array of contemporary technology will be used only as intended, i.e., sociologically, and that they themselves will control these frightful weapons and wield this monstrous power. But technology itself remains culturally blind. Consequently, no con- clusions which usually can be drawn from the central domains of spiritual life can be derived from pure technology as nothing but technology—neither a concept of cultural progress, nor a type of clerc or spiritual leader, nor a speciﬁc political system.
So far the hope that a politically dominant elite would de- velop out of the community of technical inventors has not been fulﬁlled. The constructions of Saint-Simon and other sociologists who anticipated an “industrial” society are either not purely tech- nical (but rather mixed with humanitarian-moral and economic elements) or simply fantastic. Not even the economic direction of the contemporary economy is in the hands of technicians, and un- til now nobody has been able to construe a social order led by technicians other than as one lacking any leadership or direction. Even Georges Sorel did not remain an engineer; he became a clerc. No signiﬁcant technical invention can ever calculate its ob- jective political results. The inventions of the ﬁfteenth and six- teenth centuries produced liberating, individualistic, and rebel- lious developments. The invention of the printing press led to freedom of the press. Today technical inventions are the means of the domination of the masses on a large scale. Radio belongs to a broadcasting monopoly; ﬁlm, to the censor. The decision concern- ing freedom and slavery lies not in technology as such, which can be revolutionary or reactionary, can serve freedom or oppression, centralization or decentralization. Neither a political question nor a political answer can be derived from purely technical principles and perspectives.
The previous German generation was under the spell of a cultural decline; it did not have to await the World War, and cer- tainly not the 1918 collapse and Spengler’s Decline of the West. Ex-
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	93
pressions of such a mood can be found in Ernst Troeltsch, Max Weber, and Walter Rathenau. The irresistible power of technology appears here as the domination of spiritlessness over spirit or, per- haps, as an ingenious but soulless mechanism. A European century which bewailed the maladie du siècle and awaited the domination of Caliban or “After us the Savage God” was succeeded by a Ger- man generation which complained about a soulless age of technol- ogy in which the soul is helpless and powerless. In Max Scheler’s metaphysics of the powerless god or in Leopold Ziegler’s7 con- struction of a merely incidental, ﬂuctuating, and ultimately pow- erless elite there is still evidence of helplessness (be it of the soul or the spirit) vis-à-vis the age of technology.
The anxiety was legitimate because it sprang from dark feelings about the consequences of the just concluded process of neutralization. Along with technology, intellectual neutrality had become intellectually meaningless. Once everything had been ab- stracted from religion and theology, then from metaphysics and the state, everything appeared to have been abstracted above all from culture, ending in the neutrality of cultural death. Whereas a vulgar mass religion predicated on the apparent neutrality of technology awaited human paradise, the greatest sociologists felt that the tendency which had dominated all stages of the modern European spirit now threatened culture itself. To this was added the anxiety of the new classes and masses which had arisen from the tabula rasa created by restless technicization. New and even alien masses threatening to traditional education and taste contin- ually arose from this cultural and social nothingness. But the anx- iety was ultimately nothing more than the doubt about the ability to control and utilize the marvelous instruments of the new tech- nology. A result of human understanding and specialized knowl- edge, such as a discipline and in particular modern technology, also cannot simply be presented as dead and soulless any more
7 Leopold Ziegler (1888 –1958) was a philosopher and historian of religions.
94	Carl Schmitt
than can the religion of technicity be confused with technology it- self. The spirit of technicity, which has led to the mass belief in an anti-religious activism, is still spirit; perhaps an evil and demonic spirit, but not one which can be dismissed as mechanistic and at- tributed to technology. It is perhaps something gruesome, but not itself technical and mechanical. It is the belief in an activistic metaphysics—the belief in unlimited power and the domination of man over nature, even over human nature; the belief in the un- limited “receding of natural boundaries,” in the unlimited possi- bilities for change and prosperity. Such a belief can be called fan- tastic and satanic, but not simply dead, spiritless, or mechanized soullessness.

The fear of cultural and social nothingness sprang more from an anxiety-ridden panic over the threatened status quo than from a cool-headed knowledge of the peculiarity of intellectual processes and their dynamics. All new and great impulses, every revolution and reformation, every new elite originates from as- ceticism and voluntary or involuntary poverty (poverty meaning above all the renunciation of the security of the status quo). Orig- inal Christianity and all serious reforms within Christianity—the Benedictine, Cluniac, and Franciscan renewals, the Baptists and the Puritans—every genuine rebirth seeking to return to some original principle, every genuine ritornar al principio, every return to pure, uncorrupted nature appears as cultural or social nothing- ness to the comfort and ease of the existing status quo. It grows silently and in darkness, and a historian or sociologist would rec- ognize only nothingness in its initial phases. The moment of bril- liant representation is also and at once the moment in which every link to the secret and inconspicuous beginning is endangered.


The process of continuous neutralization of various do- mains of cultural life has reached its end because technology is at hand. Technology is no longer neutral ground in the sense of the
The Age of Neutralizations and Depoliticizations (1929)	95
process of neutralization; every strong politics will make use of it. For this reason, the present century can only be understood pro- visionally as the century of technology. How ultimately it should be understood will be revealed only when it is known which type of politics is strong enough to master the new technology and which type of genuine friend-enemy groupings can develop on this new ground.
Great masses of industrialized peoples today still cling to a torpid religion of technicity because they, like all masses, seek rad- ical results and believe subconsciously that the absolute depoliti- cization sought after four centuries can be found here and that universal peace begins here. Yet technology can do nothing more than intensify peace or war; it is equally available to both. In this respect, nothing changes by speaking in the name of and employ- ing the magic formula of peace. Today we see through the fog of names and words with which the psycho-technical machinery of mass suggestion works.
Today we even recognize the secret law of this vocabulary and know that the most terrible war is pursued only in the name of peace, the most terrible oppression only in the name of free- dom, the most terrible inhumanity only in the name of humanity. Finally, we also see through the mood of that generation which saw only spiritual death or a soulless mechanism in the age of technicity. We recognize the pluralism of spiritual life and know that the central domain of spiritual existence cannot be a neutral domain and that it is wrong to solve a political problem with the antithesis of organic and mechanistic, life and death. A life which has only death as its antithesis is no longer life but powerlessness and helplessness. Whoever knows no other enemy than death and recognizes in his enemy nothing more than an empty mechanism is nearer to death than life. The comfortable antithesis of the or- ganic and the mechanistic is itself something crudely mechanistic. A grouping which sees on the one side only spirit and life and on the other only death and mechanism signiﬁes nothing more than a renunciation of the struggle and amounts to nothing more than
96	Carl Schmitt
a romantic lament. For life struggles not with death, spirit not with spiritlessness; spirit struggles with spirit, life with life, and out of the power of an integral understanding of this arises the or- der of human things. Ab integro nascitur ordo.8

8 Schmitt abbreviates the ﬁfth line of Virgil’s Eclogue IV, which reads, “Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo,” often rendered, “a new world or- der is born,” or “a great order of the ages is born anew.” In the context of Schmitt’s remarks here, the abridgement could be interpreted to mean, “from integrity or- der is born” or “an order is born from renewal.”